# Fundamentals for Urban Public Transport Systems Operations & Management

## 1 Basic Operation Elements

### 1. Line, Network, Stop and Station

- Transit Line

  - the infrastructure and service provided on a fixed alignment by vehicles or trains operating on a predetermined schedule.

- Transit Network

  - a set of lines that connect with or cross each other and that are coordinated for efficient operation and provision of integrated services in an area.

- Transit Stop

  - **a location** along a line at which transit vehicles stop to pick up or drop off passengers.

  - Facilities: signs, information, bench, shelter, ...

- Transit Station

  - **a special structure** and facility for passenger boarding and alighting, waiting, and transfer.

  - Facilities: boarding platform, mezzanine, stairway, fare collection equipment, turnback and storage tracks, ...

- Transfer Stop/ Stations

  - joint stops/stations for two or more lines at which passengers can transfer between lines, Jurong East Stn.

- Terminal

  - end stops/stations on a transit line, e.g., Tuas Link Stn.

- Bus Depots (or bus garage)

  - A bus depot (or bus garage) is where buses are stored and maintained. They are essential facilities for bus operations, and provide a central location for maintenance, refuelling and bus parking, along with offices and ancillary facilities that support bus operations.

- Train Depots

  - A train depot is where trains are stabled and maintained. In Singapore, train depots support the Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) and Light Rail Transit (LRT) lines which form the backbone of the local rapid transit network. They are essential facilities for train operations, with every train line being served by at least one depot.

- Directional line length

  - one-way distance between the two terminals along the line alignment

- Total directional line length

  - sum of all directional line lengths

  - All the overlap routes of different lines will be counted

- Network length

  - total length of all directional alignments served by one or more lines

  - The overlap routes of different lines will be counted only once

### 2. Vehicles, Transit Unit, and Fleet Size

- Transit unit (TU)

  - a set of n vehicles traveling physically coupled together.

  - For single-vehicle operations such as buses, $n=1$; for train operation, $n>1$.

- Fleet size $N_f$ (unit: $\text{TU}$)

  - the total number of vehicles needed for operation of a line or an entire network.

    $$
    N_f = N + N_r + N_m
    $$

    - where $N$ is the number of vehicles required for regular service

    - where $N_r$ is the number of vehicles needed for reserve

    - where $N_m$ is the number of vehicles on maintenance and repair

### 3. Usage of Service: Passenger Volume

- Passenger Volume $P_k$ (unit: $\text{prs/h}$)

  - the number of passengers travelling past a fixed point in one direction per unit time (prs/h).

  - Passenger can board and alight only at transit stops or stations, i.e., at discrete
  points along the line. Passenger volume on a **given section $k$** is:

    $$
    P = P_B - P_A = \sum_{i=1}^{k} b_i - \sum_{i=1}^{k} a_i
    $$

    - where $b_i$ is the number of boarding passengers as the station $i$

    - $a_i$ is the number of alighting passengers as the station $i$

- Maximum Load Section (MLS) $P_\max$ (unit: $\text{prs/h}$)

  - the section on which the maximum passenger volume $P_{\max}$ is found is called the maximum load section (MLS).

### 4. Operating Elements : Headway and Frequency

- Headway $h$ (unit: $\text{min/TU}$, $\text{h/TU}$)

  - the time interval between the moments two successive TUs pass a fixed point on a transit line in the same direction, which is usually expressed in minutes, e.g., 10 min.

  - **Policy headway**: headway which is determined by the minimum level of service considered acceptable for that line, i.e., the **maximum headway**.

  - **Minimum headway**: headway which is determined by *the physical characteristics of the system* (technology, method of driving and control, degree of safety required) and station operations (rate of boarding and alighting, departure control, etc.).

   - **Clock headway**: When headways $h > 6 \min$, it is desirable to use only values divisible into 60 (7.5, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30 or 60 min), i.e., **clock headways**, because with them departure times at any stop fall on the same minutes in each hour, so that passenger can easily memorize the schedule.

- Frequency of Service $f$ (unit: $\text{TU/min}$, $\text{TU/h}$)
  
  - the number of TUs passing a point on a transit line in one direction during one hour (or some other time interval).

  - **Frequency** is inverse of the **headway**

$$
f = \frac{60}{h} \qquad 
\Bigg| \frac{f}{\text{TU/h}} \Bigg| \frac{h}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
$$

### 5. Capacity, Work and Utilization

- Line Capacity $C$ (unit: $\text{sps/h}$)

    - the maximum number of **spaces** that can be transported past a fixed point in one direction during one hour. (**dynamic capacity**)

    - 1 $\text{sp}$ represents 1 space for one passenger (spaces)

      $$
      C=C_{v} \cdot c=C_{v} \cdot n \cdot f_{\max } \qquad
      \Bigg| \frac{C}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg| \frac{C_{v}}{\text{sps/veh}} \Bigg| \frac{c}{\text{veh/h}} \Bigg| \frac{n}{\text{veh/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{f}{\text{TU/h}} \Bigg|
      $$

    - where **transit units** per hour $f_{\max}$ (unit: $\text{TU/h}$): the maximum frequency that can be physically achieved on a line under given conditions.

    - **Vehicles** per hour $c$  (unit: $\text{veh/h}$): the maximum number of vehicles that can pass a fixed point on a line in one direction during one hour, $c = n f_{\max}$.

- Vehicle Capacity $C_v$ (unit: $\text{sps/h}$)

  - the maximum number of spaces for passengers a vehicle can accommodate. (**static capacity**)

- Scheduled Line Capacity $C_o$ (unit: $\text{sps/h}$)

  - the number of spaces transported past a fixed point in one direction during one hour under *a given operating schedule*.

- Utilization coefficient of scheduled line capacity $\delta$ (non-unit)
  
  - ratio of scheduled to absolute capacities of a line.

  $$
  \delta = \frac{C_o}{C} \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{\delta}{-} \Bigg| \frac{C_o}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg| \frac{C}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

- Utilized capacity $P$ (unit: $\text{sps/h}$) 

  - the *maximum number* of passengers per hour that are actually transported.

- Capacity utilization coefficient / load factor $\alpha$ (unit: $\text{prs/sp}$)

  - ratio of utilized to offered capacity of a line

  $$
  \alpha = \frac{P}{C} \qquad 
  \Bigg| \frac{\alpha}{\text{prs/sp}} \Bigg| \frac{P}{\text{prs/h}} \Bigg| \frac{C}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

- Offered work $w_o$ (unit: $\text{sp-km(/h)}$, space-km/h) 

  - the quantity of offered service on a transit line, expressed in space-km/h.

  $$
  w_{o}=C \cdot L=f \cdot n \cdot C_{v} \cdot L \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{w}{\text{sp-km(/h)}} \Bigg| \frac{C}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{f}{\text{TU/h}} \Bigg| \frac{n}{\text{veh/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{C_{v}}{\text{sps/veh}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - where $L$ is the entire length

- Utilized work $w_p$ (unit: $\text{prs-km(/h)}$, passenger-km/h) 

  - the passenger-km/h traveled on the line

  $$
  w_{p} = \sum_{i} p_{i} \cdot S_{i} \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{w}{\text{prs-km(/h)}} \Bigg| \frac{p_i}{\text{prs/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S_i}{\text{km}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - where $p_i$ is passenger volume on section $i$ of the line;

  - $S_{i}$ is the length of section $i$ of the line
  
- Work utilization coefficient $\bar{\alpha}$ (unit: $\text{prs-km/sp-km}$)

    - ratio of scheduled to absolute capacities of a line

    $$
    \bar{\alpha} = \frac{w_p}{w_o} \qquad 
    \Bigg| \frac{\bar{\alpha}}{\text{prs-km/sp-km}} \Bigg| \frac{w_p}{\text{prs-km(/h)}} \Bigg| \frac{w_o}{\text{sp-km(/h)}} \Bigg|
    $$


### 6. Travel Time

#### 6.1 On-line Travel Time

- Running time $t_{r}$ (unit: $\text{min}$, $\text{s}$)

  - the time interval between a TU's starting from one stop and stopping at the next one, i.e., **the net travel time between stops**.

- Station standing/dwell time $t_{s}$ (unit: $\text{min}$)

  - the duration of a TU's standing at a stop for the purpose of boarding and alighting of passengers.

- Station-to-station travel time $T_{s}$ (unit: $\text{min}$)

  - the time interval between a TU's departures from two adjacent stops.

  $$
  T_{si} = t_{ri} + t_{si} 
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

- Operating time $T_o$ (unit: $\text{min}$)

  - the scheduled time interval between a departure of a TU from one terminal and its arrival at the other terminal on the line.

  $$
  T_o = \sum_{i} T_{si} = \sum_{i} (t_{ri} + t_{si})
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

- Terminal time $t_t$ (unit: $\text{min}$)

  - the time a TU spends at a line terminal.

  - Total terminal time at both terminals: $t_t' + t_t''$

  - Terminal time is provided for some or all of the following purposes:
    
    - Vehicle turning or change of driver's cab
    
    - Resting of the crew
    
    - Adjustment in schedule (e.g., to maintain uniform headway)
    
    - Recovery of delays incurred in travel

- The percent of operating time $\gamma$ (unit: $\%$)
  
  $$
  \gamma = \frac{t_t' + t_t''}{2T_o}  \times 100\% \qquad 
    \Bigg| \frac{\gamma}{\%} \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - The value of $\gamma$ usually varies between 10% and 30%
  
- Cycle time $T$ (unit: $\text{min}$)

  - *the total round trip time on a line*, or the interval between the two consecutive times a TU in a regular service leaves the same terminal. It consists of operating times for the two directions and terminal times at both terminals.

  $$
  T = T_o' + T_o'' + t_t' + t_t'' 
  \quad \text{or} \quad 
  T = 2(T_o + t_t)
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\min} \Bigg|
  $$

- Deadhead time $t_d$ (unit: $\text{min}$)
  
  - the portion of TU travel time during which the TU is not in passenger (revenue) service. It includes travel from depot to the line and back, or between lines when a TU is reassigned.

- Platform time $T_p$ (unit: $\text{min}$)

  - the total time a TU is in operation. When a TU makes $k$ round trips on a line and has both deadhead times equal, its platform time:

  $$
  T_p = kT + 2 t_d
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

#### 6.2 Passenger travel times

- Access time $t_a$ (unit: $\text{min}$, $\text{s}$)

  - the time which an individual passenger requires for approach to a transit stop or departure form a stop to his destination for a give trip.

  - Land Transport Master Plan 2040: "8 in 10 households living within 10
minutes' walk of a train station by 2030."

- Waiting time $t_w$ (unit: $\text{min}$, $\text{s}$)

  - the time between passenger arrival at a stop and the time of TU departure.

  - For frequent transit service, the average waiting time is equal to half of the headway.

  - For headways $h>6$ or 10 min, passengers  begin to use a timetable and adjust their arrivals to the scheduled TU departures, so that the average waiting time becomes shorter than for random passenger arrivals and remain approximately constant for long headway.

- On-line travel time $t_o$ (unit: $\text{min}$, $\text{s}$)

  - the duration of passengers in a TU for a given trip.

- Transfer time $t_f$ (unit: $\text{min}$, $\text{s}$)

  - the time used for transferring between different lines or modes, i.e., the interval between alighting one TU and boarding another.

  - Transfer time depends on the walking time between two line platform, on headway of the second line, and on schedule coordination between the lines.

- Origin-destination travel time $T_{od}$

  - the total passenger's travel time from his point of origin to his point of destination.

  $$
  T_{od} = t_a + t_w + t_o + t_f
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

### 7. Speeds

#### 7.1 Vehicle & Alignment Speeds

- Maximum technical speed $V_{\text{max}}$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)
  
    - the highest speed a transit unit is physically capable of achieving on a straight horizonal way under normal weather conditions when its maximum power is applied and acceleration has gradually ceased.

- Line design speed $V_d$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the maximum speed transit vehicles can achieve on *a given section* of *line with adequate comfort and safety* when physical conditions govern.

- Legal speed $V_l$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)
  
  - the maximum speed transit vehicles can legally operate on *a given section* of line. Legal speed can be changed with traffic conditions, between day and night, etc.

- Programmed speed $V_g$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)
  
  - the speed transit vehicles can operate meeting *given standards of safety, comfort, economy, and vehicle performance*.

- **Vehicle speed** and **alignment speeds**

  - Maximum technical speed $V_{\text{max}}$ is **Vehicle speed**

  - Line design speed $V_d$, legal speed $V_l$, programmed speed $V_g$ are **alignment speeds**

  - Speeds $V_{\text{max}}$, $V_d$, $V_l$, and $V_g$ refer to physical conditions of TUs running along the line, not considering requirements to stop and related time delays.

  - $V_{\max}$ is affected by gradient $i$, but not by $V_d$ and $V_l$.

  - $V_g \leq V_l \leq V_d$

  - Alignment gradient, as well as different street conditions on a directionally split lines, may result in different $V_g$'s for the two directions.

#### 7.2 Vehicle-on-line Speeds

- Running Speed $V_r$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the average speed TUs achieve from leaving one stop to arriving at the next one, denoted by $V_r$. Running speed is usually analyzed for individual spacings. On a spacing between stops $S_i$

  $$
  V_{ri} = \frac{60S_i}{t_{ri}} \qquad \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{t}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

- Station-to-Station Speed $V_s$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the average speed of travel between moments a TU leaves two adjacent stops, denoted by $V_s$.
  
  $$
  V_{s i}=\frac{60 S_{i}}{t_{r i}+t_{s i}}=\frac{60 S_{i}}{T_{s i}} 
  \qquad
  \Bigg|\frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{t,T}{\min } \Bigg|
  $$

- Operating or Travel Speed $V_o$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the average speed of TU travel along transit line with $j$ spacings, denoted by $V_o$. It is the speed of travel offered to the public and is therefore one of the basic elements of offered transit service performance.

  $$
  V_{o} = \frac{60 \sum_{i=1}^{j} S_{i}}{\sum_{i=1}^{j} T_{s i}}
  = \frac{60 L}{T_{o}}
  = \frac{120 L}{T_{o}^{\prime}+T_{o}^{\prime \prime}}
  \qquad 
  \Bigg|\frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S, L}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{t, T}{\min } \Bigg|
  $$

- Cycle Speed $V_c$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the average speed of a TU for a complete round trip on a line, denoted by $V_c$. This speed is the most important one for the operator, since it directly influences the number of TUs required for a given level of services, and thus the transit line's capital and operating costs.

  $$
  V_{c} = \frac{60 \cdot 2 L}{T}
  = \frac{120 L}{T}
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \Bigg|\frac{T}{\min } \Bigg|
  $$
  
  - $V_{ri} > V_{si}$ for every spacing $i$, but both vary among spacings.

  - $V_o > V_c$ is true for all cases, except for lines without terminal times (such as circle lines) on which $V_o = V_c$.

- Platform Speed $V_p$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the average speed of TUs operating on a line from the time they leave depot (garage or yard) until they return to it, i.e., during the platform time, denoted by $V_p$.
  
    $$
    V_{p} = \frac{120\left(k \cdot L+L_{d}\right)}{k \cdot T+2 t_{d}} = \frac{60 L_{p}}{T_{p}}
    \qquad
    \Bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\min} \Bigg|
    $$
  
    - where $k$ is the number of round trips performed

    - $L_d$ is the deadhead distance

    - $L_p$ is the total distance the TU travels while absent from the depot.

  - Platform speed thus includes two deadhead trips $L_d$ (between the depot and the line) and a number of round trips $k \cdot L$ on the line, so that it is influenced by the location of depot in relation to the line and various schedule requirements. It is therefore *used for measuring efficiency of vehicle deployment on individual lines*.

#### 7.3 Passengers Speeds

- Access speed $V_a$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

    - the average speed of passenger travel to and from transit stops or stations

    - 4-5 km/h for walking; 30-50 km/h for automobile

    - This speed is important for planning and analyses of transit network layout and spacing of stops/stations.

- Travel speed on line $V_o$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the operating speed on the line section that a passenger utilizes.

- Origin-destination Speed $V_{od}$ (unit: $\text{km/h}$)

  - the average speed of passenger travel along his/her path from origin to destination, including access, waiting, on-line travel and transfers, if any. For a total distance past between origin and destination $S_{od}$

  $$
  V_{od} = \frac{60S_{od}}{T_{od}}
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{T}{\text{min}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - This speed is an element of mobility (or ease of travel) by transit, and it influences modal split.

## 2 Transit Travel Characteristics

### 2.1 Characteristics of Travel on a Transit Line

- Average passenger trip length $l_{av}$ (unit: $\text{km}$)

  - is obtained when the total passenger-km are divided by the number of passengers.

  $$
  l_{a v}=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} p_{i} \cdot l_{i}}{\sum_{i=1}^{n} b_{i}}=\frac{1}{P} \sum_{i=1}^{n} p_{i} \cdot l_{i}
  \qquad \Bigg| \frac{l_{av}, l_i}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{p_i, P, b}{\text{prs/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - where $l_i$ intersection distance or spacing

  - $p_i$ is the number of passengers at section $i$

  - $b_i$ is the number of boarding passengers at station $i$ (or section $i$)

  - $P$ is the total number of passengers boarding along the line

- Average passenger volume $P_{av}$ (unit: $\text{prs/h}$)

  - is computed as the total passenger-km on the line divided by its length.
  
  $$
  P_{a v}=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} p_{i} \cdot l_{i}}{L}
  \qquad 
  \Bigg| \frac{P_{av},p_i}{\text{prs/h}} \Bigg| \frac{l, L}{\text{km}} \Bigg|
  $$

- Coefficient of flow variations $\eta_f$ (no-unit)
  
  - is the ratio of the maximum volume (on MLS) and the average volume.

  $$
  \eta_{f} = \frac{P_{\max }}{P_{a v}} = \frac{L \cdot P_{\max }}{\sum_{i=1}^{n} p_{i} \cdot l_{i}}    
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{l_i, L}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{p_i, P}{\text{prs/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - The lowest possible value of $\eta_{f}$ is 1, and it is found on lines with constant passenger load along their entire length (such as on CBD-Airport expresses). 

  - The greater the value of $\eta_{f}$ is, the lower the average load factor, and the more desirable are adjustments of offered service to passenger volume.
  
- Coefficient of passenger exchange $\eta_x$ (no-unit)
  
  - is the ratio of total passengers who board along a line to those who did not replace the alighting passengers (turnover rate).
  
  $$
  \eta_{x}=\frac{P}{P-\sum_{i=1}^{n}\left|b_{i}-a_{i}\right|}
  \qquad
  \Bigg| \frac{P, b, a}{\text{prs/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

  - where $b_i$ is the number of boarding passengers at station $i$

  - $a_i$ is the number of alighting passengers at station $i$

  - The sum in the denominator consists of absolute values of differences between boarding and alighting volumes at all stations at which **both occur**.

### 2.2 Indicators of Transit Usage

- **Riding habit:** the ratio of annual transit rides to population of the served area, indicating how much the population utilizes the transit system. Riding habit is generally greater for large cities than for small cities.

- **Mode share:** the ratio of transit travel to total travel, showing the relative role that transit plays in a city.


## References

[1] Vuchic, V. R., "1.1 Basic Operation Elements ", in *Urban transit: Operations, planning and economics*, J. Wiley & Sons, 2005, p.p. 4-22.