# Public Transport - Scheduling of Urban Public Transportation Services

## 1. Introduction to Public Transit Scheduling

Three phases of public transit scheduling

- **Phase 1 - input:** various line characteristics, passenger volumes/loads, service standards and other considerations, characteristics of vehicles and train consists, operational factors and practices for each line, and work rules and standards.

- **Phase 2 - scheduling work:** preparation of timetables or trip building, determination of blocks or block building, run-cutting (work duties for individual drivers)

- **Phase 3 - output:** schedules, blocks, runs, etc.

A TU operational cycle begins from a depot and ends at a depot

### 1.1 Transit Unit (TU) Scheduling

- **Pull-out:** The movement of a TU from a depot to a route terminal to begin revenue service.

- **Pull-in:** The movement of a TU from a route terminal back to a depot at the end of revenue service.

- **Deadhead:** A trip between route terminals or between depots and terminals while the TU is not in revenue service; typically taken to reposition the TU to start service on a new route.

- **Layover/terminal time:** A short period of time between the end of revenue service on one trip and the resumption of revenue service on the next (vehicle) trip at a terminal.

#### (1) TU Scheduling aims to determine

- **Frequency:** frequency of service,

- **Timetable:** timing of TU travel and other related operating elements

- **Fleet size:** The number of vehicles required

Outputs / Products

- Graphical and numerical schedules for operators and supervisors, such as picking lists, dispatcher's lists, etc.

- Timetable for a public transit service (route)

#### (2) Frequency vs Fleet Size

**Low frequencies:** long-distance and suburban routes, commuter transit.

**Variable headways:** determined by demand, cycle times, crew requirements, etc.

**Uniform headways:**

- minimizing waiting times for random passenger arrivals

- minimizing probability of delay propagation

- allowing simple information and providing convenience.

#### (3) Levels of Service

- Adequate transporting capacity.

  The **level of offered capacity** is determined by selection of the maximum value for load factor $\alpha$. (i.e., capacity utilization factor). It is based on the trade-off between the two basic requirements of transit operations:

  - (i) For passenger comfort and convenience, the lower values of $\alpha$ result in less crowding, higher availability of seats, and more frequent service,

  - (ii) Cost of operation is lower when a higher values of $\alpha$ is adopted because smaller number of TUs is required to transport a given passenger volume.

- A certain minimum frequency of service or maximum headway (i.e., policy headway)

#### (4) Passenger Volume/Load Distribution in Distance and Time

**Passenger load profile:** showing passenger volume $p_i$ on each section $i$ along a line during a period of time.

**Temporal variation:** showing detailed variation of passenger volume, which is used to determine TU scheduling periods.

#### (5) Scheduling Period and Design Passenger Volume/Load

Based on the passenger load profile and its temporal variation, the number and durations of different scheduling periods can be determined.

The **peak hour coefficient (PHC)**, defined as the ratio of the highest 15-min passenger volume multiplied by four, and the total counted hourly volume on the MLS denoted by $p_{\max}$

$$
PHC = \frac{4 \cdot p_{15}}{p_{\max}}
$$

The **design passenger volume/load** of a certain period is equal to:

$$
p_d =  p_{\max} \cdot PHC
$$

## 2. Maximum Passenger Load Based Frequency and Headway Determination Method

### 2.1 Frequency and Headway Determination Formulae

$$
f_j = \max \left\{
  \frac{p_{m,j}}{\alpha_j \cdot (c_v \cdot n)}, f_{\text{policy},j} 
\right\} \, (\text{TUs/hr}), 
\, \, \text{and} \, \, 
h_j = \frac{60}{f_j} \, (\text{min}),
\quad j=1,2,\cdots
$$

Or 
$$
f_j = \min \left\{
  \frac{\alpha_j \cdot (c_v \cdot n)}{p_{m,j}}, f_{\text{policy},j} 
\right\} \, (\text{min}), 
\, \, \text{and} \, \, 
f_j = \frac{60}{h_j} \, (\text{TUs/hr}),
\quad j=1,2,\cdots
$$

- where $\alpha_j$ is the desired load factor for the period $j$ 

  and $f_{\text{policy},j}$ is the minimum frequency for the period $j$ (i.e., $f_{\text{policy},j} = \frac{60}{h_{\text{policy},j}}$ )

**Remark**: The above formulae are also applicable for the design passenger volume/load $p_{d,j}$ and $p_{d,j} = \alpha_j \cdot (c_v \cdot n)$.

### 2.2 Five-Step Calculation Method

- **Step 1:** Prepare data and determine factors

  - Line length: $L (\text{km})$

  - One-way operating time: $T (\text{min})$

  - Transit unit capacity: $C (\text{sps/veh})$ and $n(\text{veh/TU})$

  - Policy headway: $h(\text{min})$

  - Desired load factor: $\alpha(\text{prs/sps})$

  - Design passenger volume/load: $P(\text{prs/h})$, includes $PHC$

  - Minimum terminal time: $t_t(\text{min})$ or minimum value of $\gamma$ (terminal time coefficient)

- **Step 2:** Compute headway and frequency

  $$
  h = \min \left\{ \frac{60 \cdot \alpha \cdot n \cdot C_v}{P_d}, h_{\text{policy}} \right\}
  $$

  Remark: If $6 < h \leq h_p$ min, we may consider to round it down to the nearest smaller of the following numbers: 6, 7.5, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30, 40, and 60 (clock headway).

  Compute frequency and the actual value of $\alpha$ using
  
  $$
  f = \frac{60}{h} \qquad \text{and} \qquad \alpha = \frac{P_d \cdot h}{60 \cdot n \cdot C_v}
  $$

- **Step 3:** Estimate fleet size

Use below equation to calculate an approximate value of cycle time $T'$:
$$
T' = 2 \cdot (T_o + t_t) 
= 2 \cdot T_o \cdot (1 + \gamma)
$$

Estimate the fleet size by 
$$
N = \left\lceil \, \frac{T'}{h} \, \right\rceil
$$

where the ceil function $\lceil \, x \, \rceil$ computes the smallest integer that is **greater than** or equal to $x$.

- **Step 4:** Compute cycle and terminal times

Compute the actual cycle $T$ with the rounded $N$ using the formula:
$$
T = h \cdot N
$$

Compute the actual terminal time $t_t$ using
$$
t_t = \frac{T - 2t_o}{2}
$$

The obtained $t_t$ represents the average value of terminal times at the two terminals, which may not be equal in practice.

- **Step 5:** Compute cycle speed
$$
V_c = \frac{60 \times 2 L}{T}
$$

## 3 Route Based Timetable Design

**Timetable**:

- A timetable for a public transit route usually consists of TU **departure times** at all route stops or at selected stops called **timepoints**.

- Typically, a timetable is given at just a single point - the route departure terminal or a major boarding stop.

- In essential, a timetable can initially be constructed at only one point, and be referred to as such, and then extended forward and backward using the average running time information or station to station travel time information.

### 3.1 Anchoring Timetable to a Single Stop

For a route-based transit timetable consisting of more than one stop, the maximum observed load in each time period associated with only a single stop ensures that the average TU load factor on each route section is less than or equal to the **desired load factor**.

Maximum observed passenger load in each time period associated with only a single stop

**Example:**

$$
\begin{array}{cc|ccccc|cc}
\hline
\text{Stop} 
  & \text{Distance} 
  & \text{Averaged}
  & \text{observed}
  & \text{passenger}
  & \text{load}
  & \text{by} 
  & \text{Average observed} 
  & \text{passenger} \\
\text{No.}  
  & \text{to next}
  & \text{scheduled}
  & \text{departure}
  & \text{time at}
  & \text{stop} 
  & \text{No.} 
  & \text{load associated} 
  & \text{with stop} \\
& \text{stop (km)}  &&&&&& \text{by hour} & \text{No.} \\ 
\hline \hline 
     &             & 6:15      & 6:50      & 7:15      & 7:35     & 7:50 & 6:00 - 7:00      & 7:00 - 8:00   \\
1    & 2           & 22        & 25        & 50        & 60       & 45   & 67               & 135           \\
2    & 1.5         & 52        & 40        & 90        & 87       & 75   & 128              & 216           \\
3    & 4.5         & 35        & 65        & 85        & 44       & 83   & 134              & 178           \\
\hline \hline 
\end{array}
$$

Note that the timetable depicts the TU **departure times**, thus, when calculate the passenger load, the passenger counts during the transiting period (for example: 6:50 - 7:15) should be split into two hours, that is:
$$
\begin{align*}
67 &= 22 + 25 + 50 \times \frac{10 \text{min}}{10 \text{min} + 15 \text{min}} = 22 + 25 + 20 \\
135 &= 50 \times \frac{10 \text{min}}{10 \text{min} + 15 \text{min}} + 60 + 45 = 30 + 60 + 45 
\end{align*}
$$

### 3.2 Even Headways with Smooth Transition Rule

One characteristic of existing timetables is the repetition of the same headway in each time period. However, a problem facing the scheduler in creating these timetables is how to set departure times in the transition segment between adjacent time periods.

#### **Example:**

Given the two already calculated headway
$$
\begin{align*}
\text{6:00-7:00 :} & \qquad h_1=25 \text{ min} \\
\text{7:00-8:00 :} & \qquad h_2=5 \text{ min}
\end{align*}
$$

We can calculate the timetable: 
$$
\begin{align*}
&6:00 \,|\, 6:25 \,|\, 6:50 \\
&7:05 \,|\, 7:10 \,|\, 7:15 \,|\, 7:20 \,|\, 7:25 \,|\, 7:30 \,|\, 7:35 \,|\, \cdots  \,|\, 8:00 
\end{align*}
$$

Where $7:05$ is calculated as:
$$
7:05 = 6:50 + 0:\frac{25+5}{2} = 6:50 + 0:15 = 7:05
$$

**Issue**: Overcrowd at 7:05 caused by the simple average headway rule.

### 3.3 Headways with Even Passenger Load Rule

Establish a curve representing the **cumulative (non-integer) frequency** determined versus time. Move horizontally for each departure until inserting the cumulative curve and vertically; this will result in the required departure time.

Passenger demand varies even within a single time period, hence resulting in even headways in an imbalanced load on individual transit units at the hourly maximum load points. On heavy-load routes and short headways, the even-headway timetable suffices. However, in the course of reducing reliability problems, we may occasionally prefer to use the even-load timetable.

Construct the cumulative passengers frequency curve (stepwise function):
$$
y = y_k +\frac{y_k - y_{k-1}}{x_k - x_{k-1}} (x - x_k), 
\quad x_{k-1} \leq x \leq x_{k}
$$

#### **Example:**

$$
\begin{array}{r|cccccc}
\text{Departure time}           & 6:15 & 6:50 & 7:15 & 7:35 & 7:50 & 8:00 \\
\text{Minutes } x               & 15   & 50   & 75   & 95   & 110  & 120 \\
\text{Cumulative passengers } y & 35   & 100  & 190  & 277  & 352  & - 
\end{array}
$$

From the above table, we can get the following function:
$$
y=\begin{cases}
      \frac{15}{35} x,     &  0 \leq x < 15 \\
 35 + \frac{65}{35}(x-15), & 15 \leq x < 50 \\
100 + \frac{90}{25}(x-50), & 50 \leq x < 75 \\
190 + \frac{87}{20}(x-75), & 75 \leq x < 95 \\
277 + \frac{75}{15}(x-95), & 95 \leq x \leq 105
\end{cases}
$$

Suppose the TU capacity is $C = 100 \text{ sps/TU}$; load factors for these two period are $\alpha_1 = 0.5$ and $\alpha_2=0.6$, respectively. Their the desired load are:
$$
C \cdot \alpha_1 = 50 \text{ sps/TU}, \qquad 
C \cdot \alpha_2 = 60 \text{ sps/TU}
$$

Then we can get the timetable:
$$
\begin{align*}
& 6:00 \ | \ 6:23 \ | \ 6:50 \\
& 7:07 \ | \ 7:22 \ | \ 7:36 \ | \ 7:48
\end{align*}
$$

where $6:23$ and $7:07$ are:
$$
\begin{align*}
6:23 \, &: \quad 50 = 35 + \frac{65}{35}(x-15) \Rightarrow x=23 \\
7:07 \, &: \quad 50+50+60 = 100 + \frac{90}{25}(x-50) \Rightarrow x=67
\end{align*}
$$

## 4 Minimum Fleet Size Determination

- **Minimum Fleet Size Problem** $N$
For a public transit network with $K$ terminals and trip schedule denoted by set $S$, determining the minimum number of transit units that can complete the trip schedule is referred to as the
minimum fleet size problem.

- **Lower Bound of $N$**
Maximum number of vehicles required to be in service at any one time during the day.

- **Actual Fleet Requirement**
Minimum number of vehicles to be dispatched from each terminal before other vehicles return to each terminal.

- Integer Linear Programming Model for the Minimum Fleet Size Problem

### 4.1 Deficit function

**Deficit function** $d(k,t)$ at terminal $k \in K$ for a given trip schedule $S$ during the schedule horizon $[T_1, T_2]$. It is a stepwise function defined across the schedule horizon that increases by one at time of each trip departure, and decreases by one at the time of each trip arrival.

Vehicle "deficit" at each terminal:

- Deficit **increases by 1** when a vehicle **departs**

- Deficit **decreases by 1** when a vehicle **arrives**

- Sum of highest deficits **across terminals** is the number of vehicles required for service

**Overall Deficit Function**

The sum of all DFs over all the terminals ($k \in K$) at time t is defined as the overall DF.
$$
g(t) = \sum_{k \in K} d(k,t)
$$

This function $g(t)$ represents the number of trips that are simultaneously in operation; i.e., a count, from a bird's-eye view at time, of the number of transit vehicles in actual service over the entire transit network of routes

### 4.2 Minimum Fleet Size

#### 4.2.1 Deficit Function to Determine the Minimum Fleet Size

If all the trips start and end within the schedule horizon $[T_1, T_2]$ and no deadheading insertions are allowed, the minimum number of vehicles required to service all the trips:
$$
\min N = \sum_{k \in K} D(k) = \sum_{k \in K} \max_{t \in [T_1, T_2]} d(k,t)
$$

- where: $K$ is the set of terminals 

  $D(k)$: maximum number of deficit for each terminal $k$, $\displaystyle D(k) = \max_{t \in [T_1, T_2]} d(k,t)$

#### 4.2.2 Improvement Strategies

- Sending a vehicle from one terminal to another as an empty trip (**deadheading**)

  - **Deadheading trip:** A trip between two terminals or between a depot and a terminal while the vehicle is not in revenue service; typically taken to reposition the vehicle to start service on a new route.

- **Shifting** vehicle dispatching times

## 5. Graphical Presentation of Public Transit Operations

Graphical presentations, such as time-distance, time-speed, distance-speed, and time-energy consumption diagrams, can be used very effectively in planning, operations, and analyses of
transit system.

**Typical diagrams:**

- The basic graphical schedule is a time-distance diagram, which has the line plotted on the ordinate and time on the abscissa.

- Real-time / operating-time diagram, which has operating time between the two terminals instead of distance plotted on the ordinate.

- Time-time graphical diagram, which shows precise times for stopping at every station.

## 6. Crew Scheduling (Run-Cutting)

It is to assign drivers or train crews to scheduled sequence of operations or transit units runs. The task in running cutting is to assign personnel to a given schedule of transit unit operations in such a manner that the total expenditure for wages is minimal, while satisfying various operating and work rules set up by the agency or specified in its agreement with employee labor union.

- **Straight run:** the basic and most desirable work shift or run, which is a continuous work shift, usually of 8 hours.

- **Split run:** since more drivers are needed during peak periods than during off-peak periods, many drivers must be scheduled to working during the two peaks with several unproductive hours between.

- **Spread time:** the time interval between the beginning of work in the morning and its termination in the afternoon.

- **Extras or trippers:** short time segments of work.

Typical Run-cutting procedure:

- **Step 1:** Develop as many straight runs as possible.

- **Step 2:** Form split runs within spread time.

- **Step 3:** Divide some straight runs into 2 or 3 segments/extras and combine these segments with the extra left over from Step 2 to form additional split runs.

- **Step 4:** Analyze the efficiency (the total expenditure) of the obtain solution. If it is not satisfactory, investigate possibilities for pairing with other routes so that transit units alternate between them, and repeat the procedure.

## 7. Measures of Operating Efficiency

### 7.1 Schedule Efficiency

The basic measure of efficiency of a transit line schedule is coefficient $\eta_t$, reflecting terminal time losses. It is defined as the ratio of the sum of operating times $T_o' + T_o''$ (in two directions) to cycle time $T$:
$$
\eta_t = \frac{T_o' + T_o''}{T} 
= \frac{T_o' + T_o''}{T_o' + T_o'' + t_t' + t_t''}
= \frac{2T_o}{T}
= \frac{1}{1+\gamma}
= 1 - \gamma'
$$

where the data can be obtained from the **Vehicle Scheduling Procedure**

The $\eta_t$ can also be expressed as the ratio of cycle speed $V_v$ to operating speed $V_o$: $\eta_t = \frac{V_c}{V_o}$

Assume $T_o' = T_o''$ and replace $T$ by $N \cdot h$, then 
$$
\eta_t = \frac{2 \, T_o}{N \, h} = 1 - \frac{2 \, t_t}{N \, h}
$$

### 7.2 Operating Personnel Efficiency

The measure of **labor force utilization** is the ratio of net productive working hours on transit line to the total number of paid hours, designed as operating personnel efficiency coefficient $\eta$. That coefficient consists of 3 elements:

- **Attendance coefficient** $\eta_a$ : represents the ratio of reported hours $t^r$ to paid hours $t^p$, accounting for losses due to vacation illness, and other absences.

- **Coefficient of run-cutting** $\eta_s$ : or the ratio of hours on transit line $t^l$ to reported hours $t^r$. It includes losses caused by split shifts, work preparation, deadheading, etc.

- **Coefficient of schedule efficiency** $\eta_t$

In short, the operating personnel efficiency coefficient is equal to:
$$
\eta = \eta_a \cdot \eta_s \cdot \eta_t
= \frac{t^r}{t^p} \cdot  \frac{T}{t^r} \cdot  \frac{T_o' +T_o ''}{T}
$$

## 8. Public Transit Scheduling Software Packages

- **Ecolane :** the easy-to-deploy, on-demand scheduling and dispatching platform empowers transit agencies to provide safe, accessible, and equitable transportation alternatives.

- **Optibus :** uses advanced optimization algorithms and machine learning to help the world's leading transit providers better run mass-transportation.

- **Remix :** is a planning platform for public transit designed to help design transit networks quickly, confidently, and clearly.

- **HASTUS :** is a complete software solution for bus, metro, tram and passenger rail operations, trusted by authorities and operators around the world.

For more information, please see: [website](https://www.g2.com/categories/public-transportation).

## Reference

[1] Vuchic, V. R., "1.4 Scheduling of Service", in Urban transit: Operations, planning and economics, J. Wiley & Sons, 2005, p.p. 44-67.

[2] A. Ceder, "Chapter 4 Timetable developing", in *Public transit planning and operation: theory, modelling and practice*, 1st ed. Amsterdam, Heidelberg: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007, p.p. 81-115.