# Capacity, Speed and Special Operations for Urban Public Transport Services

## 1. Public Transit Line Capacity

### 1.1 An Overview

**Way capacity :** the maximum number of **passenger spaces** that can be transported in vehicles passing through a point in one direction during one hour.

**Station capacity :** the maximum number of passenger spaces in vehicles stopping at a station during one hour.

**Offered capacity :** the maximum number of **passenger spaces in vehicles** that can be transported passing through a point in one direction during hour under some operational constraints such as frequency.

**Utilized capacity :** the maximum number of passengers who are actually transported per direction during one hour.

**Theorical capacity :** the capacity computed utilizing **minimum headway** for a line (i.e., route/service).

**Line capacity :**  $C$ (i.e., offered capacity)

$$
C = C_v \cdot c = C_v \cdot n \cdot f_{\max} = \frac{60 \, C_v \cdot n}{h_{\min}} 
\quad \Bigg| \frac{C}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg|  \frac{C_v}{\text{sps/veh}} \Bigg| \frac{c}{\text{veh/h}} \Bigg| \frac{n}{\text{veh/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{f}{\text{TU/h}} \Bigg|
 \frac{h}{\text{min/TU}} \Bigg|
$$

- where: **transit units (TUs) per hour** $f_{\text{max}}$ : the maximum service frequency that can be physically achieved on a line under given conditions.

- **Vehicles per hour** $c$ : the maximum number of vehicles that can pass a fixed point on a line in one direction during one hour, $c = n f_{\max}$.

- **Vehicle capacity** $C_v$: the maximum number of passenger spaces a vehicle can accommodate.

### 1.2 MRT Lines

- Tracks: double-track line, single-track line
- Crossovers
- MRT station
- Train
  - six carriages
  - Train capacity: 1,600 passenger spaces
  - Headway: 2-3 minutes (peak hours)

### 1.3 Way Capacity $C_w$ Estimation (Unit: $\text{sps/hour}$)

$$
\begin{align*}
h_{w, \min} &= t_o + t_b + t_r + t_t 
= \frac{s_o}{v} + \frac{v}{2} \cdot \frac{b_1 - b_2}{b_1 \cdot b_2} + t_r + \frac{n \cdot l'}{v} \\
C_w &= \frac{3600 \cdot n \cdot C_v}{h_{w, \min}}
\end{align*}
$$

$$
\Bigg| \frac{C_w}{\text{sps/hour}} \Bigg| \frac{C_v}{\text{sps/veh}} \Bigg|  \frac{h_{w,\min},t}{\text{s/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{n}{\text{veh/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{l}{\text{m/veh}} \Bigg| \frac{s_o,s_b}{\text{m/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{v}{\text{m/s}} \Bigg| \frac{b_1, b_2}{\text{m/s}{}^2} \Bigg|
$$

where: 
- $n \cdot l'$ : Length of TU
- $s_o$: when the LTU begins deceleration, the **separation distance** should be sufficient to allow the following TU (FTU) to stop at a distance $s_o$ behind it.
- $s_b$: is braking distance $s_b= v^2/2 b_2 - v^2/2 b_1$
- $v$: travelling speed of both leading TU (LTU) and FTU
- $t_r$: reaction time of FTU to take a braking action
- $b_1$: deceleration speed of LTU
- $b_2$: deceleration speed of FTU

### 1.4 Station Capacity $C_s$ Estimation (Unit: $\text{sps/hour}$)

On signal-controlled guided transit systems such as **MRT**, the minimum headway is determined by the relationship of two TUs (Transit Units) following each other **at a station**.

**Stopping shadow of a vehicle (or TU) :** the distance in front of the vehicle equal to its stopping distance for a given braking rate. As this distance "travel" with vehicle, it creates a "shadow area".

**Stopping shadow line :** the line, i.e., set of points, that the stopping distance "draws" as the vehicle travels. It represents the front of the shadow area.

**Critical situation :** during the LTU's departure from the station, its acceleration is interrupted by some unforeseen events and the LTU is stopped. If the LTU stops instantaneously, the critical curve in the diagram is **the path of its rear end (i.e., rear end path)**; if it decreases at a finite rate, the critical curve is **the rear-end shadow line** for the respective rate.

In no case FTU's **stopping shadow line** can be allowed to intersect the critical LTU's **rear-end shadow line**.

For maximum line capacity, the two lines touch each other at the stopping point of the FTU's front end.

The minimum headway, based on the critical situation, is calculated below under some mild conditions.

$$
\begin{align*}
h_{s, \min} &= t_s + t_r + t_a + t_t + t_b= \sqrt{\frac{2 \cdot n \cdot l'}{a}} + \frac{n \cdot l'}{v} + \frac{v \, (K+1)}{2 \, b} \\
Cs &= \frac{3600 \cdot n \cdot C_v}{h_{s, \min}} 
\end{align*}
$$

$$
\Bigg| \frac{C_s}{\text{sps/hour}} \Bigg| \frac{C_v}{\text{sps/veh}} \Bigg| \frac{h, t}{\text{s/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{n}{\text{veh/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{l}{\text{m/veh}} \Bigg| \frac{v}{\text{m/s}} \Bigg| \frac{a,b}{\text{m/s}{}^2} \Bigg|
$$

where : 
- $t_s$ : standing or dwell time at station
- $t_r$ : reaction time of FTU
- $t_a$ : acceleration time of LTU
- $t_b$ : breaking time of FTU
- $K \geq 1$ : safety factor
- $n \cdot l'$ : length of TU
- $a$ : acceleration rate of LTU
- $b$ : braking rate of FTU
- $v$ : speed of the FTU

### 1.5 Station Standing Time $t_s$ Estimation

Station standing time (i.e., dwell time) consists of the time lost prior to opening and after closing of doors, and the time required for passenger boarding and alighting.

boarding and alighting via different doors
$$
t_s = t_o + \max \left(b' \cdot \tau_b \, , \, a' \cdot \tau_a \right)
\qquad
\Bigg| \frac{t}{\text{s}} \Bigg| \frac{b', a'}{\text{prs}} \Bigg| \frac{\tau}{\text{s/prs}} \Bigg|
$$

boarding and alighting on all doors
$$
t_s = t_o + b' \cdot \tau_b + a' \cdot \tau_a
$$

where:
- $t_o$ : time lost prior to opening and after closing of doors
- $b', a'$ : number of boarding and alighting passengers using the busiest door, i.e., the door involving the lonest passenger exchange. $b'= (b_i/n') \cdot \xi_b$ , $a'=(a_i/n') \cdot \xi_a$
- $\tau_b, \tau_a$ : boarding and alighting times per person.
- $\xi_b, \xi_a$ : coefficients of passengers distribution **among doors**, defined as the ratios of maximum to average number of boarding and alighting passengers per door
- $n'$ : number of boarding/alighting channels

### 1.6 Six-Step Capacity Estimation Procedure

To present a complete description of conditions under which the capacity is achieved, the following set of elements should be given:

- Offered capacity $C$ (sps/h)
- Operating speed $V_o$ (km/h)
- Comfort standard $\sigma$ (m$^2$/sp): minimum area per standee
- Reliability $R$ (%) : percent of TU departures within a certain time interval after the scheduled times
- Load factor $\alpha$ (prs/sp) : ratio of utilized to offered capacity

**Step 1 :** Collect the following data
- seating capacity of vehicle : $C_s$ (sps/veh), 
- standing area of vehicle : $A$ (m$^2$/veh), 
- number of door channels of vehicle : $n'$ (chan/veh)
- maximum number of vehicle per TU $n_{\max}$ (veh/TU)
- maximum passenger volume $P_{\max}$ 
- peak hour coefficient $PHC$

**Step 2 :** Observe, measure, compute, or predict
- Boarding and alighting unit times
- Minimum average headways $h_{\min}$ (s/TU) at all potentially critical points and **select the largest one**
- Maximum line frequency $f_{\max} = 3600 / h_{\min}$ (TU/h)
- Operating speed $V_o$ (km/h)
- Reliability of service $R$ (%)

**Step 3 :** Adopt standards for comfort $\sigma$ (m$^2$/sp) and utilization $a_{\max}$ (prs/sp)

**Step 4 :** Compute vehicle and TU capacities
$$
C_v = C_s + \frac{A}{\sigma} \ (\text{sps/veh})
$$

**Step 5 :** Compute offered and utilized capacities
$$
\begin{align*}
C &= f_{\max} \cdot C_{\text{TU}} = \frac{3600 \cdot C_v \cdot N_{\max}}{h_{\min}} \ (\text{sps/h})\\
C_P &= \alpha_{\max} \cdot C \ (\text{prs/h})
\end{align*}
$$

**Step 6 :** Summarize the capacity data:
$$
C, \ \ C_P, \ \ \sigma, \ \ \alpha_{\max}, \ \ V_o, \ \ \text{and} \ \ R
$$

### 1.7 Systems approach to transit line capacity

If a MRT (Metro) line is formulated as a system, its ability to transport passengers is determined by two types of capacity:

#### (1) Line transporting capacity in TUs

While line capacity is analyzed as a continuous system for the entire line, each station must have sufficient capacity to accommodate its passenger volumes, and these capacities vary among stations.

The line capacity should always be the critical one because the line – its tracks, stations, and trains – performs the transportation network. Therefore, the capacity discussed untilled now refers to line capacity and its critical locations, **usually the station with the large exchange of passengers, causing the longest minimum headway**.

#### (2) Passenger entrance/exit capacities at stations along the line

## 2. Impact Analysis of Public Transit Speed

### 2.1 Desirability of operating speed increase

Increasing speed on an evaluation of transit speed increase existing line results in shorter passenger travel times and usually in decreased investment and operating costs for the agency.

The operator thus should make every effort to achieve
as high a speed as operational and economic conditions allow. For example, vehicle design; intersection and street design; traffic signal priorities for transit, etc.

### 2.2 Sensitivity analysis of transit speed to elements of cycle time

**Assumptions :**

- The length of any **interstation spacing** $S_i$ is sufficiently great that the vehicle can reach its maximum speed.

- The average acceleration rate $\bar{a}$ and deceleration rate $\bar{b}$ are constant.

- Standing time $t_s$ in each station is constant while standing time at each terminal exclusive of terminal layover time is $t_s/2$.

- There are no influences of way alignment or grade on vehicle travel.

- No coasting is applied.

#### (1) Operating time and cycle time

**Operating time** : 
$$
\begin{align*}
T_o &= n \, (t_a + t_b + t_s) + \sum_{i=1}^{n} t_{vi} 
= n \cdot \frac{V}{216} \left( \frac{1}{\bar{a}} + \frac{1}{\bar{b}} \right) + n \cdot t_s + n \cdot \frac{60 \cdot S}{V} 
\\
&= \frac{60 L}{V} + n \cdot T_l
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{a,b}{\text{m/s}{}^{2}} \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S,L}{\text{km}} \Bigg|
\end{align*}
$$

- where $n$ is the number of spacings (equal to the station number minus one)
- $t_a$ and $t_b$ are average acceleration time and breaking time
- $\bar{a}$ and $\bar{b}$ are average acceleration speed and deceleration speed
- $t_s$ is average dwelling (station) time
- $S$ is average interstation spacing: $n \cdot S = L$
- and $T_l$ is loss time due to stopping:
$$
T_l = t_a + t_b + t_s =
\frac{V}{216} \left( \frac{1}{\bar{a}} + \frac{1}{\bar{b}} \right) + t_s
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{a,b}{\text{km}} \Bigg|
$$

**cycle time** : 
$$
T = 2 \, (T_o + t_t)
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{T,t}{\min}\Bigg|
$$
- where $t_t$ is terminal time.

All independent variables except $t_t$ affect both $T_o$ and $T$

#### (2) Sensitivity of $T_o$ to $a$, $b$ and $V$

$T_o$ as a function of acceleration (or deceleration) rate $a$ can be obtained from the above function, assuming all other parameters are constant.
$$
T_o = \frac{60 L}{V} + \frac{n V}{216} \left(\frac{1}{\bar{a}} + \frac{1}{\bar{b}} \right)
$$

**Sensitivity** of $T_o$ to changes in $\bar{a}$ (or $\bar{b}$) is expressed by its partial derivative with respect to $\bar{a}$:
$$
\frac{\partial T_o}{\partial \bar{a}} =
- \, n \cdot \frac{V}{216 \, \bar{a}^2}
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{T}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{a}{\text{m/s}{}^2} \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg|
$$

The curves indicate that with increasing acceleration rate $\bar{a}$, sensitivity of travel time to acceleration rate decrease. **Thus, it is useful to increase acceleration rates when they are low**.

The curves also shows that sensitivity is higher when the number of stations $n$ is greater.

**Sensitivity** of $T_o$ to changes in speed $V$
$$
\frac{\partial T_o}{\partial V} =
\frac{n V}{216} \left(\frac{1}{\bar{a}} + \frac{1}{\bar{b}} \right) - \frac{60 \cdot n \cdot S}{V^2}
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{T}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{a,b}{\text{m/s}{}^2} \Bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{S}{\text{km}} \Bigg|
$$

The reduction in $T_o$ from a unit increase in $V$ is the largest when the initial value of $V$ is small.

For any given value of $S$, $T_o$ depends on $V$ only to a certain point $S_c$ of $S$, since beyond that point the given spacing is not sufficiently long for the vehicle to attain that maximum speed $V$.

#### (3) Sensitivity of $T_o$ to $t_s$, $n$ and $t_t$

$$
T_o = n \, (t_a + t_b + t_s) + \sum_{i=1}^{n} t_{vi} 
= n \cdot \frac{V}{216} \left( \frac{1}{\bar{a}} + \frac{1}{\bar{b}} \right) + n \cdot t_s + n \cdot \frac{60 \cdot S}{V} 
$$

$T_o$ is very sensitive to $t_s$ and to the entire marginal time loss due to an additional stopping $T_l$, because these time increments are multiplied by $n$.

The number of stops along a line $n$, and duration of TUs standing at the stops $t_s$, have a direct influence on $T_o$ regardless of other variables.

### 2.3 Possible measures for speed increase

- Vehicle design and performance characteristics

Interior circulation, double-channel doors, low-floor vehicle, dynamic characteristics

- Intersection and street design

Intersection design, construction of bus stops bulb-outs or sidewalk extensions, elimination of curb parking, introduction of transit lanes or exclusive transit ROW category B for rail lines, Introduction of transit/pedestrian malls

- Traffic signal priorities for transit

Passive priority measures, active priority measures (early green, extended green, changed phase sequence, activation of a special phase), signal preemption

- Transit stops

Increasing spacings between stops to the extent which area coverage allows, alternating near-side and far-side stop locations along a street with synchronized signalization

- Elements of transit operations

Faster fare collection, changes in route layout, introduction of express, skip-stop, and zonal operations

### 2.4 Cost and benefit analysis for speed increase measures

To decide whether the introduction of a measure for speed increase is justified, an operator must make an **analysis of all its benefit and cost** in the broad sense, i.e., not only through travel time or monetary aspects.

Results of such analyses should be used in justifying the effort required for speed increase and determining who should participate in it and to what extent.

1) Increased vehicle operating speed

2) Reduced user travel time

3) Reduced fleet size
    With the increase in vehicle operating speed, the operator has two options:
    i) Decrease fleet size while maintaining the existing headway; This option reduces operating cost. This option can only be taken when the difference between the cycle times before and after the improvement $T-T'$ is at least equal to one headway, so that the same service frequency can be maintained if one TU is withdrawn.
    ii) Decrease headway while maintaining the existing fleet size. The second opinion enables higher service frequency. If the same fleet size is maintained, the operator can try to reduce headway as a result of cycle speed increase.

4) Interest on revenue
    Another advantage of **prepaid tickets or passes** are introduced is that the operator receives revenue in advance and **can collect interest** on it.

5) User convenience
    The introduction of the self-service system with prepaid tickets greatly increases user convenience: passenger do not have to prepare cash for each ride or to show transfers. Greater convenience, coupled with reduced travel time, may result in attraction of new riders.

6) Simplified monitoring of payment and accounting 
    The simpler fare-collection procedure resulting from the improvement eases the driver's supervision of fare collection, accounting procedures at the office are simplified.

## 3. Stops and Stopping Regimes

**Stopping Regimes :** the method of selection stoppings, i.e., determination whether TUs make stoppings at all designated stops or only at those at which passengers request.

**Demand stopping :** the regime when TUs stop at any location that passengers on board or along a street demand.

**On-call stopping :** the operating practice in which there are fixed stop locations, but TUs stop only at stops where passengers demand.

**Fixed stopping :** the regime in which all TUs stop at all stopping locations regardless of whether any passengers will board or alight.

The diagrams show that with demand stopping regime the number of stoppings increase and operating speed decreases rather rapidly as passenger volume increases.

- At a certain point the on-call regime offers an increase in operating speed sufficient to offset the additional walking of passengers to stops as compared to ubiquitous stopping in the demand regime.

- As increasing incidence of stoppings further decreases operating speed, it eventually becomes advantageous to change to a fixed stopping regime. This change again increases the average access distance of passengers compared to on-call operation, but it increases the operating speed of the line.

## 4. Accelerated Rail Transit Operations with Fixed Stopping Schedule

If station locations are fixed, the only way to **increase speed** is to introduce accelerated operations, in which some TUs do not stop at some of the stations, following a fixed predetermined schedule. The three basic accelerated operations are skip-stop, zonal, and express/local.

### 4.1 Skip-stop operation

Skip-stop is the only type of operation by which operating speed on transit lines **with only two tracks** (i.e., one track for one direction) can be increased while maintain high frequency and high line capacity.

- Classify stations along a line into three groups: A, B, and AB.

- TUs are operated in two patterns: 
  - trains A stop at A and AB stations, 
  - while trains B stop B and AB stations. 

As trains A and B alternate, A and B stations are served by every other TU, while at AB stations all TUs stop.

Considerations for the selection of **A and B stations** are:

- They should be the stations with **the smallest numbers of passengers**.

- The total number of passengers at A and those at B stations should be similar to maintain **even loadings of A and B TUs**.

- The number of A and B stations should be the same to **maintain uniform headways at AB stations**.

- There should be as **few consecutive A-B station pairs** as possible, to minimize the number of links between A and B stations that can not be traveled without **reversing**, i.e., traveling to an AB station beyond the destination and then taking another TU back. (**inconvenience for some group of passengers**)

**Potential applications:** Lines with many stations and short headways, such as metro lines and high-frequency light rail lines or bus line

### 4.2 Zonal operation

Zonal operation is obtained when a line is divided into two or more sections, referred to as zones, and each zone is served by a different set of trains.

- The line can have only two tracks, but there must be **crossovers or, desirably, a third track for reversing at terminal stations of each zone.**

- Passenger volume on the line must be substantial, so that acceptable headways can be provided for each zone.

- End stations for each zone should be major ones by passenger volumes and have an **adequate turnback facility**.

**Advantages and disadvantages** compared to standard operation:

- **Advantages**
  - Faster and more comfortable travel between center city and stations beyond first zone; 
  - Greater number of shorter TUs usually results in lower fleet size requirement; 
  - Usually lower operating costs.

- **Disadvantages**
  - Inconvenient or impossible travel among zones; Lower frequency of service at most stations; 
  - Lower line capacity; 
  - More complicated operation and uneven headways may cause passenger confusion and lower reliable of service.

**Potential applications** on the lines when the following conditions exist:
- They serve virtually exclusively cumulative travel from many points to one or several center city stations.
- The line operates considerably below its capacity.
- There are, or can be constructed, turnback facilities at the stations that would be convenient as terminals for individual zones.

### 4.3 Express/local operation

The only way to provide regular service among **all stations** as well as higher-speed service stopping only at **major stations** is to operate both **local and express services**.

- Depending on the number of tracks and station types on a transit line, there can be several types of express/local operations.

Only with **two-track** operation express/local can be considered as an alternative to standard (local only) operation.

Express/local on two-track lines, compare with local operation only, results in:

- **Advantages**
  - Reduced travel times and increased comfort for some passengers;
  - Better fleet utilization (more car-km of service operated).

- **Disdvantages**
  - Longer waiting time for passengers at local stations;
  - More complex service, requiring high reliability.

**Applications:**

- **Two-track lines with express/local operations** are most extensively used on Japanese metro and regional rail systems.

- **Four-track lines with express / local operations** represent the highest-investment / highest capacity transit facilities, so that their applications are mostly found on older rail transit lines in large cities.

- **Multiple express/local operations** are also provided on a number of regional rail
lines in major cities.

### 4.4 Methodology for selection of accelerated operation (for a two-track line)

- **Step 1: analyze the number of stations along the line.** If there are few stations, accelerated services should not be considered since the potential for time savings is small and it is not worth the increased complexity for passengers. If the number of stations is considerable, accelerated services should be considered.

- **Step 2: examine travel patterns.** If most trips follow a "many-to-one" pattern, such as travel on radial line into center city, zonal service (as well as skip-stop and express/local) may be considered. If there is a significant number of trips among different stations along the line, zonal service should be eliminated as an option.

- **Step 3: compare passenger volume on the line to its capacity.** If the volume is considerably lower, all types of accelerated services can be used; if the line operates close to capacity, only skip-stop remains as an alternative to the local service.

- **Step 4: analyze headway lengths.** Short headways allow all accelerated services subject to operational feasibility. Long headways make accelerated services infeasible because it is not tolerable for passengers to wait long and then have a train pass through their station without stopping.

**Summary**

These four steps that define general feasibility of different types of accelerated services are summarized in the following table:
$$
\begin{array}{lr|cccc}
\hline \hline
\text{Characteristic}   & \text{Type of Service} & \text{Local} & \text{Skip-stop} & \text{Zonal} & \text{Express/local} \\ \hline
\text{Stations}         & \text{Many}            & +     & +         & +     & +             \\
                        & \text{Few}             & +     & -         & -     & -             \\
\text{Travel Pattern}   & \text{Many-to-one}     & +     & +         & +     & +             \\
                        & \text{Many-to-many}    & +     & +         & -     & -             \\
\text{Passenger volume} & \text{Moderate}        & +     & +         & +     & +             \\
                        & \text{As capacity}     & +     & +         & -     & -             \\
\text{Headways}         & \text{Short}           & +     & +         & +     & +             \\
                        & \text{Long}            & +     & -         & -     & -             \\
\hline \hline
\end{array}
$$

While local service can be used under all conditions, accelerated services generally require four conditions: 
- (i) many stations on a line, 
- (ii) many-to-one travel pattern, 
- (iii) passenger volume lower than line capacity, and 
- (iv) rather short headway.

## 5. Scheduling of Single-track Lines, Circle Lines and Trunk Lines with Branches

### 5.1 Layouts vs. Operations

- Single-track line

- Circle line

- Trunk line with branches

Planning and design of special geometric forms of transit lines, such as closed circles or major trunk lines with several branches, often impose special relationships between geometric elements and operating conditions on the lines.

### 5.2 Single-track line

- The **general formula** is that on a line with $N$ sections there are $N-1$ meeting points, $N-2$ sections between meeting points, and two end sections, and for full schedule there must be $N runs or TUs in service. The total length of line $L$ is:
  $$
  L = S'_e + S''_e + \sum_{i=1}^{N} S_{t_0}^i
  $$
  - where $S'_e$ and $S''_e$ are the distances of two end sections
    $S_{t_0}^i$ is the distance of section $i$

- **Travel time** on a spacing between two **turnouts**, $t_{t_o}$, can be expressed by the distance between these two turnouts $S_{t_o}$ and operating speed $V_o$. That time must be equal to one half of the line headway, namely,
  $$
  t_{t_o} = \frac{60 S_{t_o}}{V_o} = \frac{h}{2}
  \qquad \Bigg| \frac{h, t_{t_o}}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{S_{t_o}}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{V_o}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

- The relationship among $S_{t_o}$, $h$, and $V_o$:
  $$
  S_{t_o} = \frac{h \cdot V_o}{120}
  \qquad \Bigg| \frac{h}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{S_{t_o}}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{V_o}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg|
  $$

- The two end sections of a line, between the last meeting points and its terminals, should have operating times shorter than the travel times on the middle sections between turnouts to allow for the terminal times $t_t'$. The **length of an end section**, $S_e'$, is computed as:
  $$
  S_e' = \frac{h - t_t'}{120} \cdot V_o
  \qquad \Bigg| \frac{h, t_t'}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{S_{t_o}}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{V_o}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg|
  $$
  - where $t_t'$ is the terminal time

### 5.3 Circle line

- On circle lines, **operating time** around the circle $T_o$ is equal to the cycle time $T$. Therefore, if uniform headways are operated, $T$ can only have values that are integer multiples of the headway.
  $$
  T_o = T = n \cdot h
  \qquad \Bigg| \frac{T}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{h}{\min} \Bigg| \frac{N}{-} \Bigg|
  $$

  Transit lines in the form of a closed circle are unique due to the fact that they operate **without terminal times**.

- **Operating speed** $V_o$ can be computed from the line length $L$ and operating time $T_o$:
  $$
  V_o = \frac{60 L}{T_o}
  \qquad \Bigg| \frac{V_o}{\text{km/h}} \Bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \Bigg| \frac{T}{\min} \Bigg|
  $$

### 5.4 Trunk line with branches

Their scheduling involves the determination of frequencies, capacities, and headways offered on the trunk and branch sections.

#### (1) Trunk frequency $f_t$ and average headway $\bar{h}_t$

When trains or buses from two or more branches merge into a joint line section/trunk without coupling short into longer trains, the **trunk frequency** $f_t$ is the sum of frequencies on branches:
$$
f_t = \sum_i f_i 
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{f}{\text{TU/h}} \Bigg|
$$

**The average joint headway** on the trunk section $\bar{h}_t$ can be computed from the headways on individual lines $h_i$ via their frequencies:
$$
\bar{h}_t = \frac{60}{f_t}
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{h}{\text{min/TU}} \Bigg| \frac{f}{\text{TU/min}} \Bigg|
$$

#### (2) Capacities of trunk $C_t$

The relationship between **capacities offered on the trunk** $C_t$ and on $k$ branches can be:
$$
C_t = \sum_{i=1}^{k}C_i = \sum_{i=1}^{k} f_i \cdot n_i \cdot C_{vi}
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{C_t, C_i}{\text{sps/h}} \Bigg| \frac{F}{\text{TU/h}} \Bigg| \frac{n}{\text{veh/TU}} \Bigg| 
\frac{C_{vi}}{\text{sps/veh}} \Bigg|
$$

- where $n_i$ is the number of cars per transit unit and 
$C_{vi}$ is car capacity on branch $i$

#### (3) Average waiting time of passengers $t_w$

The **average waiting time** of passengers $t_w$ on a joint section of two lines with headway $h_1$ and $h_2$ ( $h_1 \leq h_2$ ) is calculated by:
$$
\bar{t}_w = \frac{h_1}{2} \left( 1- \frac{h_1}{2 h_2} \right)
\qquad \Bigg| \frac{t,h}{\min} \Bigg|
$$

**Note:**

- This equation is valid only when passengers arrive randomly, i.e., for line with short headway ($\leq 10 \min$ ).
- For $h_2 \rightarrow \infty$, that is only one line operates, it gives $\bar{t}_w = h_1/2$
- For $h_1 = h_2$, that is uniform merge, one gets $\bar{t}_w = h_1/4$
- For all other values, $h_1 < h_2 < \infty$, we have $h_1/4 < \bar{t}_w < h_1/2$
  
#### (4) Trunk/branch line capacities and headways

## Reference

[1] Vuchic, V. R., "2 Capacity, Speed, Accelerated and Special Operations", in Urban transit: Operations, planning and economics, J. Wiley & Sons, 2005, p.p. 78-154.