# Urban Public Transport Planning & Design Principles

## 1. Introduction to Urban Public Transport Planning

### 1.1 Supply and Demand for Different Public Transport Planning Objectives

**To achieve the social goal of mobility for residents**, a supply and demand situation (objectives 1 and 2) should be developed.

- **Objective 1:** the minimum standard of public transport supply is acceptable in different types of areas, various time dimensions (day, week, year).

- **Objective 2:** the minimum demand follows from the politically defined criteria of the types and numbers of journey that every citizens take.

**To achieve the goal of relieving car traffic** in order to provide a more efficient transportation system, the relevant field for supply and demand for public transport supported by public funds should be defined by the objectives 3 and 4.

- **Objective 3:** defines the increase in service level that is needed in addition to the socially defined minimum standard, so that travellers are attracted away from their cars.

- **Objective 4:** defines the minimum demand and income from fares that is needed to be able to run public transport services with a standard that is attractive enough to compete with individual car transport.

**Higher ambitions** of the role of public transport: the public transport system may be further developed to replace car use in the urban region (car lite). The role of the public transport system would be quantitatively defined by objectives 5 and 6.

- **Objective 5:** indicates the service level and high quality standards to all elements in the system that this high ambition will need.

- **Objective 6:** indicates the volume of demand that is needed for the PT system to play the desired role as the major transport system of a city.

### 1.2 Public Transport Planning

Public transport planning is an established knowledge based discipline that spans from the detailed **day-to-day operational planning of crew**, other staff and vehicle planning to very **long term network planning issue**.

Short-term, Medium-term Long-term public transport planning
- Long-term, 6-25 years
- Medium-term, 2-5 years
- Short-term, 0-1+ years

#### (1) Long-Term Public Transport Planning

System-wide/general questions might be:
- Which kind of PT system suits the planned urban development?
- What kind of urban development will be made possible, depending on which PT system will be provided?
- In which corridors or geographical sectors of the urban region is the need for a complementary PT system most urgent?

Questions for a new town's PT planning:
- Which system should be built and introduced?
- Shall the network be a linehaul system or should it be demand-responsive?
- What network density should be assumed?
- How should the system be financed? To what extent should it be subsidized?
- What are the appropriate fare levels and structure?

#### (2) Medium-term Public Transport Planning

To improve the level of service in:
- Density of network (lines or corridors)
- Type of service (line-haul or demand responsive service line, full-stop local bus or - express routes, etc.)
- Type of public transport mode (bus, light rail, metro, rail, ferry, other)
- Prices and fare structure
- Service schedule and frequency
- Type of buses and comfort and convenience on board vehicles, as well as environmental aspects.
- Comfort and convenience at stops and terminals (e.g. shelter, platforms, etc.)
- Information strategy and system branding and marketing.

Questions most often raised:
- What are the costs (investment, operating and maintenance) of the new service or solution?
- What are the benefits to the users, who gains and who looses?
- Is a new service worth the extra money spent on the project?
- What will be the impact on market shares, traffic safety and air quality of that service?

#### (3) Short-term Public Transport Planning

**Short term PT planning depends on present conditions and near-future trends** such as new built projects and implemented regulation.

Short term PT planning may include:
- Service (re)scheduling, purchase and replacement of new vehicles
- Modification of existing or opening of new lines and networks
- Some infrastructure changes
- Changes of fare structure and collection method

### 1.3 Comprehensive Urban Transport Planning

In Singapore: 

Data collection:
- SG Pop.: 5,638,700
- Area: 721 km2
- GDP: 589 billions $

Travel Modes:
- Automobiles
- Bus
- Taxi
- MRT/LRT
- Shared-Bicycle
- Walking

Transportation system:
- road system, 3,356km
- expressways, 161km
- electronic road pricing
- bus companies, Go-Ahead, Tower-Transit, SBS Transit and SMRT Corporation
- MRT: 5 lines, 199.6km, 120 stations
- LRT (2014): 3 lines, 28.6km, 41 stations

## 2. Public Transport Plan Development, Evaluation and Selection

### 2.1 Public Transport Planning Procedure – Singapore MRT

#### History of Singapore MRT

The Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) system is a rail network that is the backbone of Singapore's public transport system. History of Singapore MRT:

- The idea of constructing a rapid transit line in the country was initiated in **1967**.

- The MRT proposal was later incorporated into the Ring Concept Plan (also known as the 1971 Concept Plan) in April **1970**.

- To study the feasibility of the system, the government embarked on a series of mass-transit studies between **1972 and 1980**, with the aid of the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.

- It took **10 years** since 1972 to design the MRT system, which continued all the way until the government gave permission to build the MRT.

- MRT system began construction in **October 1983** and began operations on **7 November 1987**.

- Three studies about debate of MRT, the **first study** (1972–1974), the **second study** (1974-1976), and the **third study** (1979–1980), are good examples of PT planning.

#### (1) Design of alternative plans

**(a) Transit system goals and objectives: role of transit**
- **To ease traffic congestion**: by the 1970s, traffic congestion in the city had also worsened, making it imperative for action to be taken to ease the congestion.
- **To solve transportation problem caused by population**: projecting a population of **3.4 million** by 1992, Singapore need improved road infrastructure and a mass transit system to cope with the anticipated increase in travel to the central area of Singapore.
- **To reduce pollution**

**(b) Local conditions**

- Examination of existing transport demands, services, policies and problems

- Effect of redevelopment and economic restructuring on travel demand and patterns

- **The number of workers in the CBD by 1982 would reach the critical threshold of 260,000. The buses would not be able to cope with this figure.**

- **Land use**: decentralization of economic and business activities in the CBD; possible sub-cities and more than one CBD (Hansen team, 1980)

**(c) Travel demand**

- Forecasts of future basic activity levels, and from these forecasts, make projections of requirements for transport facilities, especially the need for high-capacity mass transit services

- **1968 traffic survey supplemented by manual counts** at 16 locations on a screen line encompassing the CBD

**(d) Determine generic mode and alternative plans**

Working on the basis of a vehicle restraint transit systems, the study team examined alternative transit systems. The following were proposed for testing and evaluation

- **System 1**: An **all-bus system**, operating primarily on rights-of-way shared with other traffic;

- **System 2**: A system featuring a slightly modified version of the Basic Mass Rapid Transit (Basic MRT) Rail System combination with an extensive bus network;

- **System 3**: An alternative rail rapid transit system with complementary bus network which was developed on the basis of computer analysis of travel demand corridors;

- **System 3R**: A modified version of System 3;

- **System 4**: An all-bus system which features special bus facilities, including an **exclusive busway above and underground**;

- **System 5**: A modified version of System 4, providing limited-stop services on the busway and intermediate ramps.

#### (2) Evaluation and selection of alternative plans

Systematic analyses and comparisons of alternative transport investments and policies in terms of their economic costs and benefits, service quality and environmental impacts:

**Economic comparison**

- **All bus**: by 1992, there would be a need for 3,900 buses (of varying sizes) to carry 17.3 passenger kilometre per day or an investment of S$385 million (1975 prices). There would be a need for 100 local lines operating over 874 kilometres of unduplicated one-way routes

- The proposed **bus-rail combination** system: it would allow the bus to perform as feeders and for normal operations in those areas outside the immediate vicinity of the rail system. The rail system would serve the most congested corridors. The buses would thus be limited to about 68% of the total daily passenger kilometre, a smaller fleet size and payroll while leaving the CBD primarily as a rail service area.

**Transit comparison**

- Under an **all-bus** system peak period via public transport to the restricted zone (or CBD) would be an estimated 256,000 transport trips by 1992 of which 125,416 trips would be made during the morning peak.

- Under the **bus-rail combination**, the bus would be responsible for 43,000 morning trips to the CBD,
while the railway would carry 97,500 trips.

#### (3) Preliminary system design

- **When the general line or network layout and mode have been selected, planning proceeds to preliminary engineering.** This phase consists of a review and detailed determination of the alignments and projected passenger volumes by line section and design of system components.

- Multiple engineering and operational factors, e.g. financial issue, should be considered in the preliminary system design

- The proposed plan for the system of MRT:
  - A combination rail rapid transit and bus system
  - Rail component consists of two lines, 24 miles long, with 9.7 miles underground
  - Total of 31 stations
  - Bust network consists of a total of 125 services

#### (4) Typical Public Transport Planning Procedure

- (0) Define Goals and Objective
- (1) Design of Alternative Plans
- (2) Evaluation and Selection of Alternative Plans (Transit assignment models / software packages are needed)
- (3) Preliminary System Design

## 3. Objectives, Principles and Considerations for Public Transport Network / Line Design

Three Primary Objectives in Public Transport Network / Line Design

- **Perform maximum transportation work**: fulfil as many as possible passenger-trips or passenger-km by a service provision of high travel speed, passenger convenience, and comfortability. 

- **Achieve maximum operating efficiency**: minimize the total system cost for a required performance
level.

- **Create positive impacts**: include a variety of effects, from short-range ones, such as reduction of highway congestion, to the long range goals, such as achievement of high population mobility, desirable land use patterns, sustainability, and high quality of life.

Some important specific objectives include, but not limited to

- **Area coverage**: defined as percent of the total urban area that is within 5-minute (primary) and 10- minute (secondary) **walking distance** of transit stations

- **Travel desire lines**: transit lines should be designed to follow as closely as possible major O-D (origin-destination) patterns of travel in order to attract and serve the maximum number of passengers.

- **Directness of travel**: measured as the ratio of passenger-km traveled on the network to passenger-km along straight O-D lines, expresses an efficiency of the network design.

- **System stability, understandability, connectedness, revenue**, etc.

**Stability**: To enhance the guarantee of Public Transport e.g. Zurich 100 years at 6 min headways
- The 'Backbone' (骨干) of urban Structure
- Assist in influencing urban structure
- Strong and robust (permanent) structure is needed
- Flexibility via temporal variation in service levels
- Often a rationale for the preference of rail to bus based transit

**Coverage**: Enable maximum access in the catchment
- Ensure catchment is well covered with access to all services
- Note it is impossible to cover a full city with direct transfer free services
- Coverage is a trade off with cost

**Directness**: Fast direct alignment; no Transfer Journey
- Directness index should less than 1.4
- Directness is also a trade-off with stop spacing

**Simplicity/ Understandability**: Easy to understand; simple to operate and provide
- Sydney Bus Route with 29 route variants
- Melbourne bus network average of 2-3 route variants per route.

**Connectedness**: Easy to get between network sections
- Many missing links in existing networks – some are deliberate competitive strategies between operators
- Integrated single ticket multimodal fares are **a major strategy which enhances connectedness**
- Enhances the markets ability to use the whole network
- Coordination of services and operating as a single service are major aims

**Cost Efficiency**: Minimise cost, maximise revenue
- Cost efficiency drives network design where subsidy concerns are high
- Can result in underservicing of marginal areas and demands
- Without competition, tendency to limit network to high yield/ long walk distances and minimal structure
- Common for low urban density cities and suburbs

**Network Effect**: Design to Maximise System Usage
- The "network effect" argues that high frequency & grid networks maximise transit competitiveness
- Most transit elasticities show LOW effects of service improvements on transit demand
- These are based on single/marginal changes to routes/services
- Network Effect occurs where users are willing to transfer and 100% network cover of a city

## 4. Geometry of Public Transport Lines

- More Attentions Drawn on Travel Demand Forecasting for Urban Transportation Planning
- Less Studies Focusing on Supply Side of Public Transport Planning

### 4.1 Spacing of Parallel Public Transport Lines on Public Transit Corridor

**Assumption**:
- (i) The total passenger volume in the corridor with a width $W$ requires transit services with a total frequency of $F$ TUs per hour
- (ii) Population is **evenly distributed** and the number of transit riders does not depend on the positions of lines

**Decision variables and objective**:
Determine **the location and frequency** of each line by minimizing the total access distance of passengers.

**Optimal solution:**
$$
W_i = \frac{W}{2n}(2i-1), \ i=1,2,\cdots,n
\qquad
f_i = \frac{F}{n}, \ \ i=1,2,\cdots,n
$$
where:
- $n$ is the number of lines; 
- $i$ is the $i$-th line as $W_i$ distance from the left boundary of the corridor.

The average and maximum access distances to the lines, $\bar{L}_a$ and $L_{a, \max}$, respectively are:
$$
\bar{L}_a = \frac{w}{4n},
\qquad
L_{a, \max} = \frac{w}{2n}
$$

When planning transit lines in real-world situations, this model must be enhanced to consider additional factors:

- passenger preference depend on such local factors as passenger trip lengths, walking conditions, and quality of transit service.

- the concentration of passenger volume on fewer lines, and ultimately on one line, increases the feasibility of upgrading that line to improve operating condition or introduction of a higher performance mode

#### Specific examples in real world

**Examples 1:** 

- In **low-density areas**, rail lines can be **800m apart**, requiring a maximum walking distance of 400m or walking time of 5 min.

- In **higher-density areas**, shorter across is desirable, but spacing of lines should not be so small that frequency during off-peak hours drops **below 6 TU/h**.

**Examples 2:** 

Parallel metro lines at a distance of **800m are considered to provide the basic area coverage**, in cities with large populations and high density the demand for quality of service as well as high passenger volumes often justify construction of lines under parallel avenues at a distance of 300-500 m, e.g., Paris, Tokyo, Berlin & New York City

### 4.2 Line Lengths

**Merits and Negatives**

**Merits**

- **Merit 1:** Long lines can serve more trips directly than short lines.
  
  For example: A line with 10 stations serves $ \binom{10}{2} = 45$ station-to-station two-way links. If it is extended by 1 station, it serves station-to-station two-way links 10 more ($\binom{11}{2} - \binom{10}{2} = 55-45 = 10$ ).

- **Merit 2:** Long lines have a smaller proportion of terminal time, and vehicles and labor are better utilized.

**Negative**

- Long lines may result in less efficient scheduling and run-cutting (long cycle times are difficult to fit into shifts).

- Long surface lines may have a problem of major delay propagation.

**Consideration of line length**

- If the line is short, a large portion of its riders must transfer bus routes, and a major section of the trunk is still served by less efficient buses.

- The line is extended in the alignment with the heaviest transit ridership so far into the suburb, that no feeders are needed in that direction.

- A solution between these two extremes, where the trunk divides in two branches and still has some feeders.

**Design principles**

- Consider spatial size of the urban area and type of line

- Focus on scheduling and operation of long cycle times

- When planning radial MRT/subway lines, set up additional line segments reasonably

**Example:** two extreme cases in Singapore

- The longest trunk Bus Service in SG is SMRT's Bus Service 61.

  The 38.8 km journey starts from Bukit Batok Central and heads towards Clementi, Ulu Pandan, Queensway, Harbourfront, Chinatown, Clark Quay, Bugis, Lavender and all the way till Eunos Interchange.

- The shortest bus loop route in the island is Bus Service 284, at just 1.7km long. 

  Bus service 284 offers a commute that takes users a hop, a skip and a bus ride away. Three stops and they are back where they started. The service begins at Clementi bus interchange and trundles along Clementi Avenue 4. At the end of the road, it U-turns and returns to the interchange. The feeder bus service trip lasts all of 15 minutes.

### 4.3 Line Alignments

- Street transit often follows circuitous routing for collection/distribution in low-density residential areas. It should not be used at mid-route, since such alignment creates delays that are often unacceptable for passengers from outer areas.

- When passenger volume is substantial, this service should be provided by two separate lines, one performing local collection/ distribution and the other running express over the inner section to center city.

**Design principles**

- The combination of two functions: collection/distribution of passengers and their transport over a distance

- Good area service and high travel speed depend on the number and distribution of passengers along the line and their trip lengths.

- The alignment of heavily traveled lines should follow the direction of major passenger travel desire lines.

### 4.4 Independence versus Integrated Lines

Two basic types of transit lines: independent and integrated lines
- Their use is related to the modes: bus, LRT, and MRT/metro.

- Independent lines have independent alignments, without overlaps with other lines. In the left of the below figure, passenger can travel between any two stations of the network with at most one transfer.

- Integrated lines are those that have **branches, converge, and mutually overlap on portions of layouts** do occur. In the right of the below figure, direct service is provided among all six terminals and all stations, no passenger has to transfer.

**Independent lines:**
- Simple to operate
- Low utilization of offered capacity
- Networks with independent lines are used mostly on very heavily used metro networks

**Integrated lines:**
- High operational complexity
- Delay on one line may be transferred to other lines
- Easy-to-recover in case of any incidents
- High chance/flexibility to eliminate transfers

**Example:**

If the three lines are operated **independently** with a frequency on each line, for example, 15 TU/h (four-minute headway) for each line, passengers can travel between any two stations of network with at most one transfer, and their total average waiting time is 4 minutes ( $h/2$ at their origin and $h/2$ at the transfer station).

If the same network is operated as **fully integrated**, i.e., direct service is provided among all six terminals, $\binom{6}{2}=15$ lines are operated instead of 3. Since there are direct lines between all network sections and all stations, no passenger has to transfer. However, the 15 TU/h are now distributed to five lines instead of one, so that the frequency of service on each line is $15/5 = 3$ TU/h. With $h=20$ minutes, the average waiting time is 10 minutes.

**A Example for integrated lines**:

The New York City Subway system is the best example of an integrated metro/MRT network. Its division A is with the following features:
- Three parallel lines with multi-branches at all three outward sections
- Two of the trunk lines (lines 1-3, 9, and 4-6) with converging branches on both sides
- Multiple tracks on many sections of the lines, with different lines using separate pairs
- **Skip-stop operation** on some sections (north end of lines 1 and 9)
- **Local-express operations** on several long line sections

## 5. Types of Public Transport Lines and Their Characteristics

### 5.1 Radial and Diametrical Lines

**Radial lines** with **one terminus in the city centre**, the other in the suburbs, tend to follow the major demand directions.
- Decreasing passenger volumes outward from the centre
- Serving major volumes of commuter traffic
- Radial lines often have sharp peaking 

**Diametrical (直径的) lines** connect suburbs on different sides of the city centre.
- Follow radial direction, passing through the central area
- May be straight or diagonal lines going through central city and connecting suburbs on its opposite sides by the shortest path.

### 5.2 Tangential, Circle and Loop Lines

**Tangential (切线的) or cross-town lines**
- Following a **tangential direction with respect to the city center**, are common in cities with a grid street pattern;
- Often operate on streets with major commercial activities, schools, etc.
- Be spaced several blocks from each other
- Lower demand but less peaked

**Circle or ring lines**: Yellow line in Singapore
- Provide a direct connection among numerous medium-to-high density areas around city.
- Be effective distributors for radial metro and regional rail lines.
- Circle lines enable many suburb-to-suburb trips to use a radical-circle-radial path. 

**Loop Lines:**
- Portions of regular two-way lines
- Have a closed circle at one end of the line
- Usually with one-way operation
- Often used for short-haul services within CBD, or for collection/distribution of rail passengers in the CBD or the suburbs.

### 5.3 Trunk Lines with Branches and Feeders

Starting as heavily travelled **trunk lines** from the city outward, they divide into a greater number of lines with lower loads serving large, often low-density suburban areas.

By their design and type of operation, these distributed lines may be of two type:

- those that provide direct service from the trunk are **branches**;

- others, which operate independently from trunk line station in outward directions, are **feeders**.

#### (1) Functional Aspects

**Branches**, compared to feeders, have the following advantages:

- Provide for passenger a continuous services without transfers and delays between center city and suburban areas.
- Being longer lines, trunk branches have smaller percentage of cycle times than trunk feeders.

- Transfer station are not needed.

**Feeders** have the following advantages over branches:

- Each line section can be optimized with respect to mode and vehicle type (or TU) used, schedule, etc.; load factor are higher, fleet size smaller, and operating costs lower.

- Use of higher-performance vehicles/mode (usually rail) on the trunk provides superior service at lower operating cost than smaller vehicles from branches (buses) can provide.

- Regular headways can be operated on the trunk and on each feeder line.

- More reliable service: delays are less likely to transfer between trunk and feeders.

- Suburban terminals for trunk offer not only trunk/feeders transfer, but also transfer among feeder lines, providing greater network connectivity.

#### (2) Operation Aspects

- **Capacity limitations** on the trunk may limit the maximum frequency that can be offered on individual branches.

- **Uneven passenger volumes** on different branches may create problem in scheduling individual branches.

- **Type of operation and control of branch convergence** is very important for reliability and capacity of the lines.

Three basic operating modes for trunk and feed services :

- MRT/Metro and Regional Rail Modes
- Light Rail Transit Mode
- Bus Mode

#### (3) Passenger Volume Aspects

**The ratio of passenger volumes on the trunk and on the distribution sections** - the dominant factor influencing the choice between branches and feeders for suburban distribution, as well as the selection of modes for the feeders

When most of the trunk volume is distributed into two directions with similar volumes, the same transit mode can be used to serve the trunk and branches.

But when there are many distribution lines and they have much lower volumes than the trunk, use of the same mode for both sections would lead to excessive stretching of modes out of their optimal domains.

#### (4) Selection of Branches or Feeders

**Select the optimal mode for the trunk section.** This selection should be based on such factors as critical passenger volume, required level of service, cost impacts.

**Tentatively select optimal modes for each distribution section (potential branch or feeder)**. In addition to the factors considered in mode choice for the trunk, mode selection for these sections must be made considering the selection made for the trunk.

**Develop a tentative schedule** (TU capacities and operating headways in peak and off-peak hour) for the system of modes optimal for each section and test its operational feasibility.

- Could the trunk schedule(TU capacities and headways ) be reasonably split into schedules of two or more branches?

- Alternatively, could the trunk be operated if TU frequencies from two or more branches are added up at convergence point?

**Example**. The Sacramento, CA transit network before and after the opening of the LRT line: a large number of bus lines converging on the two major corridors has been replaced by a single LRT with service coordination through timed transfer station.

- The replacement of buses by the LRT line has resulted in a considerable increase in ridership and decrease in operating costs.

- The LRT line now carries over 30% of the entire system's ridership but uses less than 20% of the total operating budget.

#### (5) Rights-of-Way in Special Alignments

- Rapid Transit in Freeway (Bus Rapid Transit)

- Busways and high-occupancy vehicle facilities (HOV lanes)

- Transit malls in CBD (Bus interchange)

## 6. Transfers in Public Transport Network

Why do we need transfer?

- Form an efficient integrated transportation network

- Perform maximum transportation work

- Achieve maximum operating efficiency

- Create positive impact, e.g., saving travel time, improving coverage rate and network connectivity

### 6.1 Classification of Transfers by Headway Length

- **Cases A:** short-to-short headway
  - Delay always short, convenient
  - No need for any special schedule coordination

- **Cases B:** long-to-short headway
  - Delay always short, convenient
  - No need for any special schedule coordination

- **Cases C:** short-to-long headway Delay varies randomly
  - Delay varies greatly
  - Information about connecting runs required

- **Cases D:** long-to-long headway
  - **Cases D1:** Long-to-long, equal headways, synchronized, with overlapping station dwell times
  - **Cases D2:** Long-to-long, equal headways, but no overlapping standing times
  - **Cases D3:** Long-to-long, different headways.
  - Delay varies depending on headways:
    - Equal and simultaneous - all transfers convenient (timed transfer system, TTS)
    - Equal but not simultaneous - convenient in one direction
    - Different - impossible to coordinate; long transfer times

The number and character of transfers are influenced by:
- The relationship of each line to the transfer point: **whether it terminates or passes through it**
- Whether all lines are of similar nature (frequency, capacity, which transit node) or one is the dominate trunk line with higher performance than any other line

#### Number of transfer permutations $k$

TTS desirable for Similar Lines/Routes

- 

### 6.2 MRT Station Layout and Schedules for Simultaneous Transfers

#### (1) Layout A: Simultaneous Transfers between Weaving Lines (交织线)

**Merit:** Requiring minimum distance and no waiting.

When the alignments of two metro lines can be brought to intersect **under a flat angle**, tracks should be woven as shown in the below figure.

The two trains in each direction are then scheduled to operate with equal and simultaneous headways.

#### (2) Station Design for Transfers at Y Junctions.

If a Y-shaped radial network is operated with the **trunk continuing into one branch** while the other branch disconnected, i.e., operates as a feeder, there may be heavy transfers at the convergence of the two lines.

Main radical line from CBD(s), goes northbound and then diverges into two lines.

The **four directional transfers**, E $\rightarrow$ N, N $\rightarrow$ E, E $\rightarrow$ S, S $\rightarrow$ E are divided into two stations. Provide direct convenient transfers for all four transfers

## 7. Timed Transfer System

**Timed Transfer System (TTS)** is a network consisting of **transit lines and one or several transit centres** (or focal points of the network) at which TUs from all intersecting lines arrive simultaneously, allowing easy passenger transfers in all directions.

### 7.1 Timed Transfer Characteristics

- Allows for "many-to-many" travel but at lower cost than full grid
  - Or could be used to supplement grid during off-peak times

- May require 2 or more transfers
  - Airline hub analogy (small city to small city)

- Multi-centered systems
  - MRT stations as hubs for transfers between buses
  - Activity centers (malls, colleges, etc.) / all day use

**Some Rules**
- Most lines on identical headways ($h$)
- Travel time between TUs should be a multiple of $h$
- Some flexibility, but if $h$ varies, longer / shorter must be an integer
- Require operational discipline to guarantee connections

### 7.2 Timed Transfer System Scheduling

TTS is a system in which arrivals and departures of TUs from different lines at a transit center must be **simultaneous at a time interval** referred to as the **pulse headway** $h_p$
- Since TTS is usually operated with lines that **carry light or moderate passenger load**, their pulse headways are long, typically 10 and 30 minutes.

- To have schedules that are **repetitive every hour**, there is actually a choice between only two different basic pulse headways, each one with a set of headways that are their fractions or multiples.
  - **15 minutes**, which also allows use of **7.5, 30, 45 and 60 minutes** on some lines
  - **20 minutes**, which also allows use of **10, 40 and 60 minutes** on some lines

Two basic/typical **pulse headway** $h_p$
- 15 minutes
- 20 minutes

The selection between 15- and 20-min $h_p$ is made on the basis of:
- The desired level (frequency) of service
- Distances between transit centers, which influence efficiency of scheduling
- Investment and operating costs, considering frequencies & TUs fleet size

#### (1) Unifocal (单焦点) network

To design a TTS operation, the network form and size (length of lines) must be coordinated with schedules of TU (vehicle) travel. The simplest TTS model for **a unifocal network** with a set of radial and diametrical lines and **a single transit center**

To operate this unifocal TTS, all the lines terminating at the center, or on through lines each one of the two sections radiating from the transit center, $L$, must have the following relationships among cycle time $T$, the number of TU $N$, and pulse headway $h_p$:
$$
j_1 \frac{T_1}{N_1} = j_2 \frac{T_2}{N_2} = j_3 \frac{T_3}{N_3} = \cdots = j_i \frac{T_i}{N_i} = h_p
\qquad 
\bigg| \frac{j}{-} \bigg| \frac{T}{\min} \bigg| \frac{N}{\text{TU}} \bigg| \frac{h}{\text{min/TU}} \bigg| 
$$
where $\displaystyle j_k = \cdots, \frac{1}{3},\frac{1}{2}, 1, 2, 3, \cdots$ and $\frac{T_i}{N_i}$ is the **offered headway** of line $i$.

When one TU operates on a line ($N=1$), the pulse headway = the cycle time: $h_{p} = T$. 
If the number of TUs $N = 2$, the headway $h = h_p/2$. 
When the line has longer cycle time $2T$, if one TU is operated, the headway $h = 2 h_p$

The cycle time $T$ is expressed through its time components & as a function of line length $L$ and operation speed $V_o$:
$$
T = 2 T_o + t_{t}' + t_{t}'' = \frac{120 L}{V_o} + t_{t}' + t_{t}''
\qquad
\bigg| \frac{T,t}{\min} \bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \bigg|
$$

The cycle time $T$ can also be expressed as function of line length $L$ and cycle speed $V_c$
$$
T = \frac{120L}{V_c} = h \cdot N
\qquad
\bigg| \frac{T}{\min} \bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \bigg| \frac{h}{\text{min/TU}} \bigg| \frac{N}{\text{TU}} \bigg| 
$$

The number of TUs on each line or its radiating section from the transit center $L_s$, $N$, can be derived from the above two equations if $T$ is replaced by $N$, $h$ and solve for $N$:
$$
N_i = \frac{120 L / V_o + \sum t_t}{ h} = \frac{120 L_{si}}{h_p \cdot V_{ci}}
\qquad
\bigg| \frac{N}{\text{TU}} \bigg| \frac{L}{\text{km}} \bigg| \frac{V}{\text{km/h}} \bigg| \frac{h}{\text{min/TU}} \bigg| \frac{t}{\min} \bigg|
$$

#### (2) Multifocal networks

In the above **bifocal network**, each transit centre has **radial and diametrical** lines, the same as uni-focal network. But between the two focal points there may be two types of lines (called **connector line**):

- **A direct connector** line is a fast line with the primary role to connect the two centers
- **A collector-distributor connector line** operates between the two centers, but has the primary purpose to serve local trips in that corridor. This line may have a considerably longer cycle time than the former, so that a greater number of TUs in operation may be needed to have the same headway as the direct connector line.

A **triangular** TTS network：forms a closed geometric pattern that places certain constraints on the connecting lines.

- If all three connector routes have the same cycle $T$, a simultaneous pulse with two TUs per line must be utilized.
- Each radial line with cycle $T$ must also have two TUs, while the radials with cycles of $0.5T$ need only one TU.
- The figure shows the geometric and operational relationships with pictorial presentation of buses (TUs) at a given moment of time.
- **Application scene:** Multifocal TTS networks are effective in large areas that have many subcenters and multi-directional travel.

### 7.3 Planning procedure of TTS

#### (1) Planning procedure of a unifocal TTS

**Step 1:** Determine for each line its $T_o$ and the minimum duration of the two terminal times; their sum represents the minimum possible **cycle time** for that line.

**Step 2:** Plot a diagram with the obtained headways and show **their adjustments** to the usable headways if $h_p$ is based on 15 minutes, and the adjustments needed if $h_p$ is 20 minutes.

**Step 3:** Compare the two sets with respect to the **level of service** and **number of TUs required**, and select the preferred one. Then headways for all lines must be adjusted to one of the headways from the adopted set and terminal times adjusted so that $T$ for each line is the same as, or a multiple of $h_p$.

**Step 4:** Compute the number of TUs for each line.

#### (2) Planning procedure of a multifocal TTS

**Step 1:** Define service area and collect information about its transit services and street network.

**Step 2:** Develop projected travel demand on all major sections of the street and transit line network

**Step 3:** Select a large number of potential locations for transit centers.

**Step 4:** Use the procedure to decide whether the basic pulse headway of 15 or 20 minutes should be used.

**Step 5:** Estimate transit operating speeds, then compute their travel times and determine approximate distance L between transit centers.

**Step 6:** Select from the large number of potential transit center locations and form a set that are approximately at distances of the computed $L$ or $2L$ apart from each other.

**Step 7:** Design the network consisting of lines connecting the selected transit centers or radiating from them.

### 7.4 Synchronized Schedules

Synchronization of schedules with clock-type headways at any transit center can be conveniently shown by a **clock-type diagram**:
- arrivals and departures of individual TUs for each line are shown on a separate concentric circle.
- With shaded areas showing dwell times for each line, which presents a clear view of their time overlaps that allow passenger transfers