# Ridership Forecasting for Urban Public Transport Routes

## 1. Reasons for Public Transport Demand Forecasting

Forecasting changes in public transport demand is an essential input for public transport service design/planning and operations & management. There are two main ways in which forecasting is important.

- **Existing Services** – to understand future market and service needs as demand or market composition changes.

  - Changes in markets can include either decline or increases in public transport demand. In this case capacity supplied needs to be adjusted to cater for demand.

  - Changes can also occur in the types and needs of users. For example, an ageing population will increase needs for universal access and can affect the cost recovery of services.

- **New Services** – to understand the performance of options for PT service development.

Public transport planning without demand forecasting (or with poor quality forecasting) risks either under-utilised resources as markets decline or overloading and crowding if public transport demands grow and capacity does not keep pace.

### 1.1 Public transport demand forecasting is an inexact art

$$
\text{Inaccuracy} = \frac{\text{Actual} - \text{Forecast}}{\text{Actual}}
$$

Example: Data from 27 railway projects cross 14 nations (Flyvbjerg, et al., 2006).
- For 72% of railway projects, forecasts are overestimated by more than two thirds;
- For 50% of road projects the difference between actual and forecasted traffic is more than $\pm 20 \%$;
- For 25% of road projects the difference is larger than $\pm 40 \%$.

**Remark:** The quality of public transport demand forecasting is considered poor in practice

### 1.2 Public-Private-Partnership Project (PPP): Bangkok's Skytrain

- Bangkok's (曼谷) Skytrain was hugely over dimensioned because the inaccuracy of demand forecast.

- The forecast demand was 600,000 riders per day for the opening of the system, **but the actual initial ridership was 150,000 (25% of forecast)**. By 2006 ridership increased to 380,000 riders per day, still significantly below predicted levels.

- As a result, **station platforms** are too long for the shortened trains that now operate the system, a large number of trains and cars are idly parked in the train garage because there is no need for them, terminals are too large, etc.

- **Ticket revenue** was only enough to meet the trains' operating cost, and not sufficient to pay construction loans.

### 1.3 What is PT Demand Forecasting

- **Step 1:** Understand **Base Case** of PT service
  Existing Situation: Where you start from

- **Step 2:** Understand **Project Case** of PT service
  Future Situation: Where you might be heading

- **Step 3:** Make **Forecast** of demand
  In making forecast it is useful to understand how and why public transport markets change

Forecast will be wrong if **mistake** is made
Forecast will be wrong if **omission** is made

## 2. Factors Leading to Change of PT Demand

### 2.1 Forecasting framework

**Forecasting framework** by considering travel behaviour change affecting public transport

**Generation (New Trips)**

- New travel not currently made
  - Entertainment travel (Off Peak)
  - Not work travel (Peak)
  - Induced demand

**Diversion**

- Existing public transport users using new service rather than existing services
  - Needs to be spatially adjacent
  - Needs to be more attractive than existing

**Mode Shift**

- Stop using car and use public transport service (very important to differentiate car drivers from car pax)
- Go from walking to using the PT service

**Redistribution**

- People change where they live and work
- Very long term affect

### 2.2 Summary

Markets for public transport change as a result of two main changes:

- **Exogenous change** – Changes caused by factors, which are outside the direct control of public transport operators or government. These include socioeconomic factors such as population and car ownership.
  
  Exogenous change in general affects the volume of travel being made. However it can result in changes in trip patterns (e.g. people living further away from city) or mode usage (e.g. a shift to more car ownership and use)

- **Endogenous change** – Changes caused by factors, which are more directly controllable by operators, including the price of fares, design and quality of service etc.

There are four main sources of demand when new public transport services or modes are introduced:

**New Trip Generation** - where new journeys are being made that previously did not occur 

**Trip Diversion** – where a journey made by existing public transport is diverted to use a new public transport service. This journey **cannot** be considered **"new"** to public transport since it already exists.

**Mode Shift** – where a person shifts from using a non-public transport mode to use the new public transport service instead. In congested CBDs, a major benefit of many investments in public transport is to divert car drivers to new public transport services as a basis for reducing congestion. However in general a far greater volume of car passengers (those getting lifts) tend to be diverted to use new public transport modes than car drivers. Also diversion of pedestrians to transit (and cyclists) also occurs.

**Trip Redistribution** – where a journey from A to B for purpose X already occurs. However as a result of providing a new public transport service to destination C the traveller decides to change destination from travel between A to B to A to C for purpose X.

## 3. Elasticities of Public Transport Demand

### 3.1 Public transport demand function – Log Model

Standard exponential time series formulation, referred to as **"log" model**.
$$
P = F^{\alpha} \cdot B^{\beta} \cdot I^{\gamma} \cdot R^{\delta} \cdot T^{\varepsilon}
$$
where:
- Response variable (dependent variable)
  - $P$ : the patronage rate (光顾率), measured as **boarding per person per year**, adjusted for car ownership and population structure

- Regressors (predictors, independent variables):
  - $F$ : the real fare level, measured as the **average fare revenue per boarding**
  - $B$ : the service level, measured as **bus km per year**
  - $I$ : the national **real income level**
  - $R$ : the real car operating cost, measured as **real petrol price**
  - $T$ : the index of the year

- Parameters, which can be calibrated by using data
  - $\alpha$ : the real fare **elasticity**
  - $\beta$ : the service level **elasticity**
  - $\gamma$ : the real income **elasticity**
  - $\delta$ : the real car operating cost **elasticity**
  - $\varepsilon$ : the residual time trend

### 3.2 Public transport demand function – Delta Model

"First-difference" formulation, based on the percentage changes in each variable (e.g. from year to year), referred to as the **"delta" model**.
$$
\frac{\Delta P}{P} = \alpha \, \frac{\Delta F}{F} + \beta \, \frac{\Delta B}{B} + \gamma \, \frac{\Delta I}{I} + \delta \frac{\Delta R}{R} + \varepsilon
$$

where: $\Delta X$ represents the percentage change in variable $X$ from one year to the next.

### 3.3 Simple linear regression method to calibrate parameters


### 3.4 Multi-linear regression method to calibrate parameters


### 3.5 Elasticity of public transport demand

Theoretically a demand function can be inatheinatically expressed as a function of the attributes (explanatory variables) mentioned above, namely,
$$
D = f(y_1, y_2, \cdots, y_m)
$$
where $D$ is PT demand (in passengers) and $y_1, y_2, \cdots, y_m$ are the attributes.
- Basically no preference is given to any functional form of demand function.
- Function form should be determined empirically for the type of application by using statistical techniques such as linear regression methods.

**Elasticity:** the responsiveness (sensitivity) of PT demand to changes in $y_i$ attribute is known as **elasticity of demand with respect to the attribute**.
- Demand elasticity concerning $y_i$ is the ratio of the percentage change in demand to the percentage change in $y_i$.

The elasticity of demand with respect to attribute $y_i$ can be defined below:
$$
e_{y_i} = \frac{\text{The proportional change in demand}}{\text{The proportional change in the explanatory variable}} = \frac{\Delta D_i/D_i}{\Delta y_i/y_i}
$$
where
- $\Delta D_i = f(y_1, y_2, \cdots, y_i+\Delta y_i, \cdots, y_m) - f(y_1, y_2, \cdots, y_i, \cdots, y_m)$ is the the change in the demand
- $\Delta y_i$ is the the change in the explanatory variable $y_i$
- $y_i$ may be anyone of a set of explanatory variables

**Example:** $y_i$ would be the fare paid if the elasticity were being measured relative to fares (i.e. the "fare" elasticity).

#### (1) Four types of elasticities – shrinkage ratio

A simplest elasticity measure, which is frequently used by public transport operators to summarise the effects on demand caused by changes in attribute $y_i$, is called the "shrinkage ratio" expressed by:
$$
e_{y_i}^s = \frac{(D_2-D_1)/D_1}{(y_{i2}-y_{i1})/y_{i1}}
= \left(\frac{D_2-D_1}{y_{i2}-y_{i1}}\right) \cdot \left(\frac{y_{i1}}{D_1}\right)
$$

- Shrinkage ratio is defined as the change in demand relative to original demand divided by the change in the attribute relative to the original attribute.

- Shrinkage ratios have **historically been used as a means of** reporting response to transit fare changes, primarily fare increases, but this method is not very accurate, particularly for large price changes.

#### (2) Four types of elasticities – arc elasticity

Several measures of the responsiveness of demand are used when larger changes in the explanatory variables are considered. The term **"arc elasticity"** is frequently used to refer to such measures.

- The arc elasticity is calculated between two points on the demand curve, using a **logarithmic form** extracted from the differential:
$$
\frac{\mathrm{d} D_i / D_i}{\mathrm{d} y_i / y_i} 
= \frac{\mathrm{d} (\ln D_i)}{\mathrm{d} (\ln y_i)}
$$

The term **"arc elasticity"** will be used here to refer to one particular measure, calculated in the following way:
$$
e_{y_i}^{\text{arc}} 
= \frac{\ln D_{i2} - \ln D_{i1}}{\ln y_{i2} - \ln y_{i1}} 
= \frac{\Delta (\ln D_i)}{\Delta (\ln y_i)}
$$
where $D_{i1}$ and $D_{i2}$ exhibit the values of the demand before and after the change of the attribute from $y_{i1}$ to $y_{i2}$, respectively.

The arc elasticity refers therefore to **two points** on the demand curve.

**Arc elasticity** is similar to shrinkage ratio. Strictly speaking an arc elasticity is the one to use for **more accurate prediction**.

In practice the **shrinkage ratio** is easier to apply and hence is used most frequently. Technical finesse in using **arc elasticities** because they are more accurate may be misplaced since the research compiling elasticity evidence rarely states what type of elasticity is measured.

#### (3) Four types of elasticities – point elasticity

The point elasticity of $y_i$ is calculated as the slope of the demand curve times the ratio of the values of $y_i$ to $D_i$:
$$
e_{y_i}^{\text{point}} 
= \lim_{\Delta y_i \to 0} \left( \frac{\Delta D_i / D_i}{\Delta y_i / y_i} \right) 
= \frac{\Delta D_i / D_i}{\Delta y_i / y_i}
= \left( \frac{\partial D_i}{\partial y_i} \right) \frac{y_i}{D_i} 
$$

This is only relevant to the particular point along the demand curve where the changes are occurring. It is effectively a linear relationship of the form for point $x_1$ to $x_2$. It needs to be recalculated at points along the curve and is hence not very helpful for practical analysis.

#### (4) Four types of elasticities – cross-elasticity

**Direct elasticities**: **shrinkage ratio**, **arc elasticity** and **point elasticity**.

**Cross-elasticity**: In a competitive environment, a change in an attribute (e. g. fare) for one transit service may affect the demand for another transit service. The sensitivity of these cross-effects is indicated by the phenomenon of cross-elasticity, expressed by:
$$
e_{y_i}^{uv} = \frac{\partial D_i^u / D_i^u}{\partial y_i^v / y_i^v}
= \left( \frac{\partial D_i^u}{\partial y_i^v} \right) \left( \frac{y_i^v}{D_i^u} \right)
$$
where 
- $e_{y_i}^{uv}$ is the (point) cross-elasticity of demand for service $u$ (e.g. PT) concerning the change in attribute $y_i$ of service $v$ (e.g. private cars);

- $D_i^{u}$ is the value of the demand function for attribute $y_i$ using service $u$;

- $y_i^v$ is the value of attribute $y_i$ using service $v$.

**Typically cross-elasticities** in public transport are measured for auto fuel prices, auto vehicle operating costs, in vehicle travel time, parking and toll charges. When these "variables of interest" change, not all auto users deterred from traveling by car
decide to use public transport. This is why studies measuring cross elasticities also tend to measure the **"diversion rate"**. This is the proportion of "deterred" car users that switch to using public transport.

In practice, it may be difficult to measure cross-elasticity (since direct effects frequently outweigh cross-effects). The following relationship shows how to **estimate it from direct elasticities**:
$$
e_{y_i}^{uv} = \left| e_{y_i}^u \right| \cdot \frac{D_i^u}{D_i^v} \cdot \frac{\partial D_i^v}{\partial D_i^u}
$$

where 
- $\left| e_{y_i}^u \right|$ (an absolute value) is the direct elasticity of demand for service $u$ for the change in attribute $y_i$ of (the same) service $u$

- $D_i^u / D_i^v$ is the ratio between the competing volumes of services, $u$ and $v$

- $\partial D_i^v / \partial D_i^u$ and is the proportion of the demand change in service $v$ and $u$ as a result of the change in $y_i^v$

TRACE (1999) provides detailed elasticity and cross-elasticity estimates for various types of travel (car-trips, car-kilometres, transit travel, walking/cycling, commuting, business, etc.) and conditions, based on numerous European studies.

## 4. Fundamentals for Public Transport Demand Forecasting

### 4.1 Two main sources for public transport demand forecasting

In making forecasts we must understand how demand is affected by supply – despite libraries of articles on this area, there are only two real ways of doing this.

There are two main sources which are used as the basis for all demand forecasting in public transport:
- **Revealed evidences** – which are market changes that have actually occurred
- **Stated preferences** – which are the intentions of users based on passenger surveys asking questions about how users might respond to new public transport services.

#### (1) Revealed evidence based approach

Revealed evidence based approach is taking actual examples of situations that have occurred and using these to make forecasts.

**Before and After Studies**

- Rail services were withdrawn from location A to location B several years ago
- They used to carry X Million passengers p.a.
- If we introduce the rail service it is like to carry around X Million passengers p.a. (forecasting)

**Benchmarking**

- The tram carried 300 passenger per hour for two trips an hour
- This is about 150 boardings per tram vehicle trip
- If we add in a new tram vehicle trip it is likely to get about 150 extra boardings (forecasting)

**Elasticity**

- When we increase fares by 10% we loose about 3% of passenger boardings
- If we increase fares by around 20% we might expect to get 6% less boardings (forecasting)

#### (2) Stated preference based approach

Stated preference based approach involves asking people how they might respond to a change in transit services.

**Example:** Household Activity Travel Survey

#### (3) Comparisons

Both approaches have strengths and weakness, but revealed evidence based has the important strength that it is based on fact.

**Revealed evidence**

- **Strengths**
  - Based on actual factual evidence

- **Weaknesses**
  - Difficulty in ensuring the circumstances where evidence was obtained are the same as the one you want to forecast for
  - Long vs short term impacts

**Stated preference**

- **Strengths**
  - Can be used to explore responses to many alternative situations **without having to build new PT services**

- **Weaknesses**
  - The **"positive answer" trend**
  - People being asked to make judgements about using public transport **they have never even seen or experienced**

## 5. Exogenous Forecasting Methods

### 5.1 Two types of demand forecast methods 

**Exogenous (外源) forecast methods:** Things that affect society as a whole – not controlled by transit operators

Socio-Economic influences on demand. Such as changes in:
- Population
- Employment/ Unemployment
- Income
- Age distribution
- Fuel costs

**Endogenous (内源) forecast methods:** Things that transit operators/planners can change

- Fare
- Service Level (Frequency)
- Travel Time/Speed
- Reliability
- Service design – route alignment
- Amenity provision (seats, shelter, information, quality of the environment, personal safety)

### 5.2 Principle of exogenous forecast

Exogenous forecasts aim to measure the impact of factors which are **outside the direct control of public transport operators** or government on public transport demand. These include socio-economic factors **such as population and car ownership**. A simple form of exogenous forecasting is to **monitor the rate of travel for a given unit of socio-economic** variable e.g. **population or land use density**.

Most exogenous forecasting methods are based on time trend analysis with the aim of understanding what factors caused changes in historical market trends and how might future markets be impacted by trends. These approaches use statistical techniques to establish the relationship between:

- **Dependent Variables** – variables for which forecasts are to be based e.g. **boardings, boardings per capita or passenger kilometres.**

- **Independent (or Explanatory) Variables** – variables which may be used to explain the level of variation in dependent variables.

### 5.2 Example of independent/dependent variables

Historical **Dependent Variables**: Things we want to measure
- Boardings
- Boardings per capita
- Passenger kms

Historical **Independent Variables**: Things that explain what we want to measure
Fare (Real)
- Vehicle km's (Service Levels)
- Motor Vehicle Ownership
- Motoring costs (real)
- Wages (real)
- Unemployment
- Others

These relationships are then applied to forecasts of future independent variable values to make forecasts of future demand.

### 5.3 Elasticity based forecasting methods

Indeed elasticities are a major outcome of studies of this type, and the techniques used to estimate the elasticities include regression analysis and factor analysis.

## 6 Concept of Endogenous Forecasting

**Endogenous forecasting** predicts changes in public transport markets caused by factors which are more directly **controllable by operators and government** including **the price of fares, design and quality of service etc.** It is usually project based forecasting since it is being undertaken to understand the market impact of new service products or redesigns of the network or route structure.

There are four types of endogenous forecasting approaches:
- Benchmarking
- Elasticities
- Generalised cost
- Advanced methods

### 6.1 Benchmarking based forecasting methods

Benchmarking involves the use of **"rule of thumb"** to undertake simple estimates of likely demand impacts. Forecasting using a benchmarking based approach entails applying measures from "previous situation" to a "project situation" for which forecasts are required.

**Example:** A tram may achieve 600,000 boardings p.a. If the "project case" envisages provision of an additional tram on the system to provide additional service, a very broad (and simplistic) forecast might be that a new tram would be likely to generate about 600,000 additional boardings p.a.

**Weakness:** Their major weakness is that they are very "broad brush". The specifics of some service change proposals can often affect demand:
- A major assumption is that existing circumstances and usage on one service will be applicable to another service which is proposed
- In reality every tram bus and rail service is unique
- Nevertheless this is a very simple and powerful tool

#### (1) Benchmarking based forecasting methods for public
transport trip rate prediction

**Trip rate analysis** uses per capita trip rates to make a forecast of demand. A more common application for forecasting is to measure typical public transport travel for a given transit service then to examine the population catchment of the service to
generate a typical trip rate. This can then be applied to predict
usage of a new service in similar circumstances based on its
catchment population.

- Trip rate analysis is clearly simplistic but is **easy, quick and cheap to apply**.

- Care needs to be taken to match service level features between
the services used to benchmark trip rates and those for which forecasts are to be undertaken.

Benchmarking based forecasting on "service effectiveness" more closely relates a forecast to the quantum of service supplied.


### 6.2 Elasticities based forecasting methods

**Elasticity** is the response of demand resulting from a change in a factor causing that response

- **A negative elasticity** implies the inverse change in demand to change in the elasticity factor e.g. Fare elasticity of -0.3 means demand will increase if fares decrease

- **Example**: **A positive elasticity** would be one for **public transport service level**. 
  - e.g. Elasticity to change in service levels = +0.4. This means an increase in the quantity of service provided would also increase demand.

- **Low elasticity values** mean demand would not change much for a given change in the factor being measured 
  - e.g. -0.02 means a 1% increase in demand for a 50% decline in the variable. This is termed **inelastic**.

- **High elasticity values** mean demand is very responsive to changes in the variable 
  - e.g., elasticity = +1.5. This means a 20% increase in the factor results in a 30% increase in demand. This is **termed elastic**.

### 6.3 Generalized travel time based forecasting methods

**Generalized time (or cost)** is identified in relation to assessing trip attributes in equivalent time and cost terms. Usually this is undertaken by applying a **"value of time"** such that time and cost can be measured in equivalent terms (usually in time terms – hence fares are converted to equivalent "in-vehicle" minutes).

**Generalized time** modeling takes a more holistic view of travel by collating and valuing each part of the journey as a basis for forecasting.

#### A simple generalized time model

$$
g = a_1 f + a_2 t_{\text{walk}} + a_3 t_{\text{wait}} + a_4 t_{\text{in-vehicle}}
$$

where:
- $g$ : generalized time of the journey
- $f$ : fare
- $t_{\text{walk}}$: walk time (including access and egress)
- $t_{\text{wait}}$: wait time to get the service
- $t_{\text{in-vehicle}}$ in-vehicle travel time
- $a_1,a_2,a_3,a_4$: unit values of time

#### Value of time (VOT)

**Value of time (VOT)** is a critical part of generalized time. There are two elements to this:

- **Value of time (VOT)** – Which converts fare into minutes of equivalent in-vehicle travel time. Traditionally VOT are related to average income
levels of the country for which they are applied. 

  - A typical value used in Australia **(DoI, 2004)** is $10.00/hour to represent an equivalent hour of in-vehicle travel time (or 16.7cent/minute). This would be the value applied to parameter a1 in the formulae above

- **Weighting of out of vehicle time** – walk and wait elements of journeys are valued more highly by passengers than the time they actually take. Hence a value for walking/waiting time is often factored up by a
  parameter to an equivalent of in-vehicle travel time. 

  - Example values of these parameters would be $a_2 = 2.0$ and $a_3 = 2.0$ (based on Transfund New Zealand, 2000)

**Example:** VOT of Singapore

> S. Hess, P. Murphy, H. Le, and W. Y. Leong, "Estimation of New Monetary Valuations of Travel Time, Quality of Travel, and Safety for Singapore", *Transportation Research Record*, vol. 2664, no. 1, pp. 79–90, Jan. 2017, doi: [10.3141/2664-09](https://doi.org/10.3141/2664-09).

#### Step-by-step procedure

Step-by-step procedure for the generalized travel time based forecasting methods

**Step 1 :** Measuring the base case generalized travel time
**Step 2 :** Estimating a project case generalize travel time
**Step 3 :** Applying a generalized time elasticity.

**Example:** An average elasticity recommended by the literature is -1.0 (Wallis and Schmidt, 2003).

#### A more comprehensive generalized time model

Generalised time models of the type indicated are the basis of most advanced modelling approaches. The form of the modelling indicated above is somewhat simplistic. The following presents a more comprehensive form for measuring total generalised time in public transport:
$$
g = V \cdot f + \big[ \, T_A \cdot W_A + T_W \cdot W_W + T_U \cdot W_U + T_I \cdot W_I + (N_T \cdot TP) + T_m + S_m \big]
$$
Where:
- $g$ : generalized time of the journey
- $V$ : value of time
- $f$ : fare
- $T_A$ : time for walk access and egress (includes time involved in walk transfers if any)
- $W_A$ : weighting of walk time
- $T_W$ : time for waiting (includes time involved in wait transfers if any)
- $W_W$ : weighting of wait time
- $T_U$ : time for unexpected waiting - this is related to unreliable services which cause waiting time beyond expected arrival time of vehicles
- $W_U$ : weighting of unexpected wait time
- $T_I$ : time for in-vehicle travel time (includes multiple vehicles if these have been used)
- $W_I$ : weighting of in-vehicle travel time (usually 1.0)
- $N_T$ : number of transfers made
- $TP$ : transfer penalty (in equivalent in-vehicle travel minutes)
- $T_m$ : mode specific constant (in equivalent in-vehicle travel time minutes)
- $S_m$ : aggregate values for soft factors (in equivalent in-vehicle travel time minutes)

The additional elements included in these formulae are:
- Transfer penalty $TP$, $N_T$
- Unexpected waiting time $T_U$, $W_U$
- Mode specific constant $T_m$
- Soft factors $S_m$

**Transfer Penalties** - measure the perceived impedance which passengers attribute to having to transfer from one vehicle to another during a public transport journey. The value is expressed as a number of minutes of equivalent in-vehicle travel time and is a constant
applied to each transfer.

**Unexpected wait time** - is a means of including the impacts of unreliability of public transport into modelling. In this case late running is being measured. A measure is used to establish how much on average services arrive later than the scheduled arrival time. This is measured in terms of equivalent in-vehicle travel time and weighted based on international evidence. An average weighting based on secondary evidence is 5.0 (Transfund New Zealand, 2000).

### 6.4 Advanced public transport demand forecasting methods

**4-step model**

The four-step model is commonly used for multi-modal transportation planning on a city wide basis. These are network models where an urban transport system and the area it covers is divided into 3 components:
- Zones - these are where trips travel from and to.
- Nodes - these represent stops or stations on the transit system. However multimodal models also have nodes at traffic intersections.
- Links - which represent travel between nodes. Links can include walk, auto or transit types.

Each of these elements has information collected for them which are inputs to the modelling process. For example zone data typically includes population and employment levels. Link data usually includes travel time on the link.

**Trip Generation :** where the volume of travel generated and attracted to zones are estimated. 

- **Trip generation** is commonly based on the socio-economic and employment characteristics of the zones. Regression modelling is often used to calibrate a trip rate per unit of population or employment.

**Trip Distribution :** where travel from and to zones are spread around the zone system to create an origin and destination matrix

- **Trip distribution** is commonly based on "gravity models". These distribute travel between zones based on the relative distance (or travel time) between them and the relative attractiveness of each zone (in terms of trip attraction).

**Mode Split :** where travel is split into the mode used

- **Mode split** is usually based on the relative generalised cost associated with travelling by each mode. Choice between modes is made using the theory of individual choice developed by Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985). A common mode split technique is the logit model.

**Trip Assignment** where each trip is allocated to a path of links through the network

- **Trip assignment** is where travel is allocated to particular paths through the network. This is usually based on the lowest cost. Efficient algorithms are used as a basis to allocate paths.

## 7. Quality in Pubic Transport Demand Forecasting

### 7.1 Levels of Error in Modelling and Data

**Measurement Error** - result from errors in independent or explanatory variables mainly due to problems in collecting accurate information. As models get more complex and detailed, it is less possible to quantify accurately to a high level of detail. Hence measurement error increases with the level of complexity.

**Specification Error** - result from deficiencies in the processes used to explain how the real world operates. Specification errors are high when behaviour is explained at a simplistic and aggregate level. As complexity in models increases, specification error declines.

### 7.2 Issues in Public Transport Demand Forecasting

Public Transport demand forecasting is **an inexact art** – it has a poor image

The process is really quite simple

An understanding of Demand and Supply is required

An understanding of how markets are affected by changes in supply is important

The main type of travel behavior change are
- trip generation
- diversion
- mode shift
- trip redistribution

There are only two real approaches to demand forecasting:
- Using revealed evidence
- Using stated intention

Forecasters need to consider
- exogenous (external factors) as well as
- endogenous (things we can change ourselves)

## Reference

[] B. Flyvbjerg, M. K. Skamris Holm, and S. L. Buhl, "Inaccuracy in Traffic Forecasts", *Transport Reviews*, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–24, Jan. 2006, [doi: 10.1080/01441640500124779](https://doi.org/10.1080/01441640500124779).

[] S. Hess, P. Murphy, H. Le, and W. Y. Leong, "Estimation of New Monetary Valuations of Travel Time, Quality of Travel, and Safety for Singapore", *Transportation Research Record*, vol. 2664, no. 1, pp. 79–90, Jan. 2017, doi: [10.3141/2664-09](https://doi.org/10.3141/2664-09).